THE UNIVERSITY OF
“) WAIKATO Research Commons
Te Whare Wananga o Warkato
 
http://researchcommons.waikato.ac.nz
Research Commons at the University of Waikato
Copyright Statement:
The digital copy of this thesis is protected by the Copyright Act 1994 (New Zealand).
The thesis may be consulted by you, provided you comply with the provisions of the Act and the following conditions of use:
e Any use you make of these documents or images must be for research or private study purposes only, and you may not make them available to any other person.
e Authors control the copyright of their thesis. You will recognise the author’s right to be identified as the author of the thesis, and due acknowledgement will be made to the author where appropriate.
e You will obtain the author’s permission before publishing any material from the thesis. Development of Microsatellite Markers for
Antarctic Bryum Hedw. Species
A thesis
submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Biological Sciences at the University of Waikato
by
Rhodri T. Harfoot
 
. The ‘ Universi
of Waikato
Te Whare Wananga 0 Waikato
The University of Waikato, April 2002 ABSTRACT
The objective of this thesis was to isolate microsatellite markers using the Glenn
 
(2001) method from the species Bryum argenteum so as to be able to study these markers in Antarctic populations of Bryum species. Microsatellite regions have been found to be highly polymorphic and neutral markers, and usually genus specific, thus making them ideal for population genetic studies. The populations to be studied in the future have a large distribution over the Southern Victoria
Land area, ranging from the Dry Valleys to Granite Harbour and Ross Island.
Mosses are the most abundant and widespread of the vascular plant groups within continental Antarctica. They inhabit locations that are some of the more extreme on earth and experience periods of desiccation and darkness that can last as long as four months. For these reasons the establishment of mosses in Antarctica 1s a subject that has attracted great debate. One hypothesis suggests that mosses first became established when the ice retreated from the land approximately 17000 years ago, at the end of the last glacial maximum. The alternative hypothesis is that mosses survived as relictual populations over this period and have recently increased their habitat range. The study of microsatellite length polymorphism in
populations will allow these hypotheses to be tested.
The genus Bryum Hedw. (Bryaceae) is a highly polymorphic, cosmopolitan genus that is abundant in Antarctica over a wide range of locations. It is found from the Sub-Antarctic zone (Sub-Antarctic islands) to the continental zone (Continental
Antarctica and Southern and Eastern Antarctic Peninsula. Thus covering a wide range of habitats from warm and wet (e.g. the Sub-Antarctic islands) to cold and
very dry (e.g. the McMurdo Dry Valleys).
To study the population genetics of Antarctic Bryum species, development of
microsatellite markers was necessary as it has been found that with less specific
methods such as RAPD-PCR, the DNA used for the analyses had been contaminated by co-extracted DNA from fungi living on the mosses, thus confounding the results obtained. Microsatellites, once developed, are genus or family specific, thus there is little risk of amplifying a contaminant when using
microsatellite markers Abstract
This project failed to isolate any microsatellite markers from Bryum argenteum, due to experimental difficulties that occurred at three major stages; ligation, transformation and hybridisation screening of the genomic library. Future
research should be focussed on completion of microsatellite isolation for this
genus and on evaluation of the population relationships among Antarctic
localities ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First and foremost I must acknowledge the support and guidance of my supervisor
Dr. Chrissen Gemmill throughout the length of the project. Without her none of this would have been possible.
 
Secondly I must thank the other members of the staff who have assisted me in many ways: Professor Dick Wilkins, Dr. Ray Cursons and Raewyn Towers for their assistance with the cloning and hybridisation steps. Professor Allan Green
for organising funding for conferences and aid in moss taxonomy. Professor Roberta Farrell and Shona Duncan for a protocol or two.
Thirdly must go to the laboratory technicians who have helped with field-work
(Catherine Beard) and ordered equipment and supplies throughout the years (Julie M‘Leod, Louise Hathaway and Duncan Miers).
Antarctica New Zealand has assisted greatly with financial support and logistics for the KO24 and K028 programmes. They do a great job of keeping things flowing down South and did their best to satisfy all our wants.
ANARE for their logistic support and funding assistance in getting this project started.
Professor Rod Seppelt and Sarah Hunger who guided me through my first experience of Antarctic moss taxonomy and were a great help with collecting and keeping track of all those samples.
The Biology Department of the University of Waikato for a scholarship supplementing my fees and for the airfares to and from the 8'" SCAR conference.
The biology secretaries, past and present, who have aided me in lots of little ways and make the department run a lot smoother.
Travis Glenn who answered my questions when even Chrissen couldn’t answer them and wrote the main protocol and shared some of his wealth of knowledge
with me via email.
The crew of D1.08 and D1.12 and other labs over the various years I have occupied them for putting up with me and all the laughs and assistance they gave.
To my friends who never seemed too concerned that I was doing GM experiments and for still being there, even when I was incommunicado for most of two years. I am sure some of you will be in the same boat over the next few years. Especially,
to Natalie for her support and assistance.
Finally, to my Family offering help, proof-reading, food and a bed so I could worry about other things 
Page Abstract ii Acknowledgements iv Table of Contents Vv List of Figures i List of Tables ix Table of Units and Abbreviations x List of Appendices xii Author’s Note xiii CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION OBJECTIVES 1 ANTARCTICA 1 Geological History 1 Glacial Development 3 The Antarctic Environment 3 Vegetation History bs) ANTARCTIC MOSSES 6 Dispersal and Colonisation 9 Genetic Variation in Mosses 11 VEGETATION ORIGINS 14 MICROSATELLITE MARKERS 15 An Introduction 15 Microsatellite Polymorphism 17 Microsatellites and Mosses 18 CHAPTER TWO: MATERIALS AND METHODS INTRODUCTION 20 FIELD COLLECTIONS 20
PROTOCOLS AND REAGENTS 23 Table of Contents
 
GENOMIC DNA EXTRACTION 23 FUNGAL DETECTION 25 Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS) 25 Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) 27 MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT 29 Genomic DNA Preparation and Size Selection 30 Vector Preparation 32 Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector 33 Competent Cell Preparation 34 Heat Shock Transformations 35 Insert Size Checks 36 Lifting of White Colonies onto Filters 38 Probing of Filters 39 Exposing and Developing Film 43 Screening Putative Positive Clones 44 Double-Stranded DNA Extraction 44 FURTHER MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT STEPS 45 Single-Stranded DNA Extraction 45 Insert Sequencing and Primer Design 46 Screening for Variation 46 Scoring Microsatellite Loci 47 MP-PCR DEVELOPMENT 48
CHAPTER THREE: RESULTS
DNA EXTRACTION 50 FUNGAL DETECTION 51 Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS) 51
Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) 5 MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT 55 Genomic DNA Preparation and Size Selection 35 Vector Preparation 35 Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector 56 Competent Cell Preparation 37 Heat Shock Transformations 37 Insert Size Checks 58 Lifting of White Colonies onto Filters 39 Probing of Filters 59 Exposing and Developing Film 61 Screening Putative Positive Clones 62 Double-Stranded DNA Extraction 63 MP-PCR ANALYSIS 65
CHAPTER FOUR: DISCUSSION
GENOMIC DNA EXTRACTIONS 67
FUNGAL DETECTION 68 Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS) 68 Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) 70
MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT 72 Microsatellite Development Techniques 73 Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector 735 Heat Shock Transformations 76 Probing of Filters 76 Double-Stranded DNA Extraction and Screening Putative 77 Positive Clones
DISPERSAL 78
MP-PCR DEVELOPMENT 80
FUTURE RESEARCH 81
CHAPTER FIVE: SUMMARY 8 APPENDICES 10 
Figure
1.1
1.2 1.3 1.4 2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4 2.5 2.6
2.7 3.1 3.2
3.3 3.4
3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.10
3.11
4.1
Title
Gondwana showing the hypothesised positions of the continents during the Jurassic period.
Climatic zones of the Antarctic region.
Taxonomic features of mosses.
Fungal growth rings on Antarctic Ceratodon purpureus.
Map of Ross Is., South Victoria Land, showing locations of
collection sites.
IT'S products showing the multiple bands characteristic of
contamination of the DNA.
RAPD banding pattern produced by three Antarctic samples, a fungal sample and a combined moss and fungal sample.
Flowchart of microsatellite development steps.
Digested Bryum argenteum DNA.
Photo of an agarose gel of DNA bands from the M13 multiple cloning site of pBluescript KS® +.
Schematic of the lifting procedure.
Extracted DNA from New Zealand Bryum argenteum.
A schematic of the ITS regions of nrDNA.
ITS bands from un-contaminated DNA samples.
ITS products showing the multiple bands characteristic of contamination of the DNA.
Banding patterns produced by RAPD-PCR.
Digested genomic DNA from samples HR 2/2 BA and HR 3/2 BA. A typical gel from the insert checks.
Typical autoradigraph of a filter after hybridisation.
M13 MCS PCR-products from picked putative positive clones. Double stranded plasmid DNA isolates from bacteria containing putative positive microsatellite clones.
PCR-products of RAPD reactions primed with a (CAA)¢ microsatellite oligonucleotide.
Bryum subrotundifolium overgrown with Nostoc and Prasiola
crispa on Beaufort Island.
 l
Page
12 21
27
29
30
31 37
39 50 31 52 52
54 56 58 62 63 64
6 
Table Title Page
2.1. Moss collections sorted by population and number of samples 23
within a locality.
2.2 Control ligation reactions. 33 2.3. Probe hybridisation and washing temperatures. 47 2.4 Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis times for different PCR 43
product sizes 
 
 
Abbreviation/ Unit Full version
3’ Three prime end of DNA (hydroxyl end)
5’ Five prime end of DNA (phosphate end)
B Beta particle; emitted during radioactive decay. y -P-NTP Nucleotide radio-labelled in the y position with
phosphorus-33
OF Degrees, minutes of latitude
°C Degrees Celsius
a Mean number of alleles at a locus
BLAST Basic local alignment search tool
bp, kb Base pairs, kilo base pairs (1000 bp)
BA, BS Bryum argenteum, Bryum subrotundifolium C Concentration (mol L”)
DNA Deoxyribose nucleic acid
G Gravity (relative centrifugal force)
g, mg, Wg, ng, pg Gram, milligram, microgram, nanogram, picogram gEW Gram equivalent weight
GPS Global positioning system
IAM Infinite allele model
ITS Internal transcribed spacer
KAM k-allele model
km, m, cm, mm, nm Kilometre, metre, centimetre, millimetre, nanometre LGM Last glacial maximum
M, mM, uM, nM, pM Mole, millimole, micromole, nanomole, picomole Ma Million years before present
MAF Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
MCS Multiple cloning site
L, mL, wL Litre, millilitre, microlitre
mJ Millijoules
MP-PCR Microsatellite primed-PCR
m, Molar mass
n Number
N Normal solution
n Number of mole
N, E, S, W North, East, South, West
nrDNA Nuclear ribosomal DNA
OD Optical Density
P Percent of polymorphic loci
PC1, PC2 Physical containment level 1/2
PCR Polymerase chain reaction
pfu Plaque-forming units
PNK Polynucleotide kinase
RAPD Randomly amplified polymorphic DNA RNA Ribose nucleic acid
Rnase Ribonuclease
a
X Table of Units and Abbreviations
eee AUIS OF UTINS ANG ALUUPENIALONS
rpm Revolutions per minute
S Second
SAP Shrimp alkaline phosphatase SMM Stepwise mutation model
SPA Specially protected area
ssDNA, dsDNA Single stranded DNA, double stranded DNA SSR Simple sequence repeat
SSSI Site of special scientific interest STR Simple tandem repeat
Tm Melting temperature
U Unit, measuring unit for enzymes UV Ultra-violet light
V Volume
VNTR Variable number tandem repeat
v/v, w/v, Volume per volume, weight per volume 
Appendix Page Appendix 1: Moss Collection List 86 Appendix 2: Reagent Protocols 137 Appendix 3: Supplementary Protocols 14 AUTHOR’S NOTE
 
It should be noted that this thesis describes the development of procedures aimed at isolating microsatellite sequences from Bryum species and as such does not present the material and methods, results and discussion in a conventional manner. Thus, there is some discussion as to why particular steps were performed in the materials and methods chapter. Some theoretical background is given in the
results sections and there is reference to various aspects of the materials and
methods in the discussion chapter.
The materials and methods chapter also presents future development steps and alternative methods of development that may be of some use to the reader. Results presented are those that are relevant to the development of the microsatellite markers, including pictures of results at various stages to elucidate how and why various steps were performed. Much of the discussion is based around the method and the experimental difficulties experienced, with a large amount of background in an effort to explain the reasoning behind the use of a
particular method.
R. T. Harfoot
5 April 2002 CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
 
OBJECTIVES
The focus of this research was to develop Bryum specific microsatellite primers for PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) based on flanking regions of the microsatellite sequences found in Antarctic Bryum species. This work was carried out as it is known that Antarctic mosses have low levels of genetic variability within Antarctica, and are not greatly different in slowly evolving genetic markers, such as the ITS region of nrDNA, from specimens collected in New Zealand and Australia. Future research will use these markers to estimate genetic variability within and among Antarctic Bryum species to reconstruct relationships
and infer dispersal patterns of mosses on the Antarctic continent.
ANTARCTICA Geological History
Antarctica consists of a large continent, approximately 14 million km? in area, of which 98% is covered in ice. Antarctica is the only polar land mass and the only significant landmass that is almost entirely ice covered. This setting means that Antarctica has a unique climate and hence biota. Antarctica has not always been geographically isolated or in a polar position, previously it was part of an aggregation of all the landmass on Earth, the super-continent called Pangaea (Valentine and Moores, 1970). Pangaea separated into three smaller supercontinents (Gondwana, North America and Eurasia) during the late Phanerozoic (Gurnis, 1988) leaving Gondwana as the southern continent. Gondwana consisted of the present-day continents of South America, Africa, Antarctica, India and Australia (Du Toit, 1937, Figure 1.1). The break up of the Gondwanan supercontinent over a period from the mid-Jurassic (180 million years before present (Ma)) to the early Eocene (55 Ma) left scattered portions of land progressing in different directions according to the motion of the tectonic plates. During this time, Antarctica moved south from a formerly semi-tropical position to its current polar position. It has been in this position for approximately 100 million years (Walton and Morris, 1990), but has been completely isolated for only 22 — 30 Ma (Craddock, 1977). 
 
0°S 20°S 40°S 60°S 60°S 40°S 20°S_—s(O°S
Figure 1.1 Gondwana showing hypothesised positions of continents in the
Jurassic period (adapted from Walton, 1984). Reproduced with the permission of the publisher.
The opening of the Drake Passage between South America and Antarctica at
approximately 22 - 30 Ma (Craddock, 1977) has isolated Antarctica from the rest of the world by expanses of ocean that are, at a minimum, 1100 km wide. The oceanic and atmospheric currents that flow within this channel maintain a close to constant temperature over the continent. These currents flow in a circular, clockwise motion around Antarctica, unimpeded by land, creating an isolating barrier that has stood since the opening of the Drake Passage between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula (Elliot, 1985). This region is called the Antarctic convergence or the Polar Frontal Zone (Hansom and Gordon, 1998) and is maintained by out-flow of cold water from the ice-sheets on the continent meeting the warm currents flowing south from the tropics. Air currents also play a role in this system through a large vortex of air, generated by the rotation of the Earth, over the Antarctic continent. The winds formed in the vortex drive the
water currents in a clockwise (eastward) direction (Hansom and Gordon, 1998) thereby maintaining the circumpolar current. The Antarctic convergence roughly
coincides with the 0°C isotherm and is generally between latitudes 50° and 60° south. Areas south of the Antarctic convergence tend to have a cold climate (sea
temperatures average 0°C or below) and are classified as Antarctic.
Glacial Development
Widespread glaciation on the Antarctic continent has probably existed for approximately the last 36 million years (Hambrey et al., 1989). However, there has been some variation in the extent of glaciation over more recent history and up to the present-day. It is thought that the extent of glaciation seen today has existed for the past 14 million years (Shackelton and Kennett, 1975), but there
have been substantial fluctuations over this time, as paleobotanical evidence
suggests that there were trees (Nothofagus sp.) and other vegetation present on the continent as recently as 3 Ma (Barrett, 1991). It is also thought that the East and West Antarctic ice sheets developed at different times. The East Antarctic ice sheet (land based) probably developed first, reaching a size that caused direct deposition of glacial till into the ocean at a date of about 30 Ma (Robin, 1988). The West Antarctica ice sheet (sea based), on the other hand, did not develop until 7 Ma (Elliot, 1985), when the climate at sea level became cold enough to allow
the development of ice shelves.
The Antarctic Environment
Antarctica can be divided into three climatic regions (Figure 1.2); sub-Antarctic
(contains the sub-Antarctic islands, out to approximately the O°C isotherm), which
has a cool climate (mean temperature +2°C); the maritime-Antarctic (areas including the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula and surrounding islands, extending out into the Scotia Sea), which has a cold climate (mean monthly air temperatures over summer O0-2°C); and the continental zone (continental
Antarctica, excluding the west side of the Antarctic peninsula), which has a frigid
climate (mean monthly summer air temperatures below 0°C) (Longton, 1985).
These classifications can also be applied to the vegetation, as the diversity and
type vegetation is dependent on the climate. Sub-Antarctic regions have relatively
lush vegetation with tussock grasses (e.g. Poa foliosa) and other macro-vegetation (e.g. Stilbocarpa polaris) dominating the ecosystem. Maritime-Antarctic regions
have lower vegetation forms, mostly dominated by extensive moss (75 species ee struction —
and lichen (150 species) tundra, though two species of angiosperm (Colobanthus
quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) have been found in this area, as have
liverworts (25 species) (e.g. Cephaloziella varians) (Lewis-Smith, 1984). Finally, continental Antarctica has very limited vegetation, restricted to the ice free areas, consisting almost entirely of localised moss (30 species) and lichen (125 species) communities (Lewis-Smith, 1984), though one species of liverwort (Cephaloziella
exiliflora) has also been found on infrequent occasions (Longton, 1985).
All terrestrial ecosystems in the Antarctic are depauperate when compared to Arctic ecosystems of the same latitude. The main reason for this is that the Antarctic is several degrees cooler than the Arctic at equivalent latitudes, which
affects water availability (Kennedy, 1993) and length of growth period, but may
also be a function of geographical isolation (Vincent, 1997).
Maritime Antarctic zone
Continental Antarctic zone
Sub-Antarctic zone
Pacific Ocean
 
Figure 1.2 Climatic zones of the Antarctic region. Modified from Hansom and Gordon (1998).
Antarctica, as the coldest continent on earth, has little available water for the
majority of the year and a limited period where growth of mosses and other floral
components can occur. This period is over the Austral summer when there i continuous sunlight in latitudes below the Antarctic Circle and air temperatures
can reach as much as +12.5°C (Bull, 1966). In contrast to this period of relative warmth, winter temperatures on continental Antarctica can reach as low as -80°C inland and may be lower than —50°C in coastal areas (Bull, 1966). Mean annual
temperatures vary around the coast but on average are approximately —12.5°C
(Ugolini, 1970). These temperatures, combined with four months of continuous darkness and the resulting extreme dryness of the air make Antarctica a very difficult place for life to exist (Llano, 1965). Despite this, Antarctica has 130 species of bryophytes (Steere, 1961), which are restricted to the ice-free areas of the continent and the surrounding islands. The ice-free areas constitute approximately 2% of the total continental landmass (Melick and Seppelt, 1997)
and apart from a few isolated nunataks, are all in coastal regions. The most
southern vegetation (a moss, species unknown) has been found at 84° 35’ S,
however lichens have been found at 86° 09’ S, in southern Victoria Land (Wise
and Gressitt, 1965), these are presumed to be the southern limits for vegetative life. The probable constraints at these latitudes are related to water availability,
lack of ice-free areas and are ultimately dependent on temperature.
Vegetation History
J. D. Hooker was the first to postulate that Antarctica has been vegetated since before the Pleistocene and was part of a greater continent, an idea that has been widely debated in the literature since it was first proposed in 1851. At the time Hooker was writing nothing was known about plate tectonics or continental movement, however since the theory and mechanisms of continental drift (Wegener 1924) were established (Holmes, 1965), an abundance of evidence has been compiled that Hooker’s theory could be borne out if there were refugia for the present-day vegetation to have dispersed from after the end of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), between 17000 and 21200 years before the present (Elliot, 1985). It is known from fossil records, that Antarctica’s vegetation was as diverse as any found at low latitudes, before the dispersal of Gondwana, and for much of the more recent history (Elliot, 1985). This vegetation was very similar to that found on other regions that had made up the Gondwanan super-continent, and was probably derived from the common origin: Gondwana. However, whether some of this vegetation could have survived the harsh environments and extensive
glaciation of the LGM is not known and is unlikely to be deduced in the nea future, due to the paucity of sub-fossil evidence. It is known that there were Nothofagus trees (evidence supporting the presence of a complex ecosystem) along the Ross Sea coast up until relatively recent times (approximately 3 Ma) (Barrett, 1991). The conditions prevailing at that time probably did not reach temperatures much above 5°C, so it is possible that there were species within this ecosystem that could have survived such conditions as those found in the LGM (Barrett, 1991), provided there were some areas free of ice, such as beyond the range of glaciation, or near geothermally heated land. The alternative hypothesis is that the present-day vegetation consists entirely of newly introduced plants (from outside the Antarctic zone) dispersed to Antarctica by wind, water and seabirds such as skuas and gulls (Lewis-Smith, 1997). Spores from fungi and bacteria have been observed in the air streams over Antarctica (Marshall, 1996) therefore it is reasonable to believe that there could be dispersal of moss and lichen spores along the same pathways (Marshall and Convey, 1997). Much of the plant life is found in regions near penguin colonies or other inhabited areas, though this is not necessarily due to the dispersal by animal vectors, but probably
more related to the abundance of nutrients in the form of guano (ornithogenic
soils) and the fact that the colonies are near the coast and in relatively warm sites,
and often have liquid water near by. The lack of evidence for animals being vectors is backed up by the many examples of bryophytes being found in areas
which have never been the site of colonisation by birds, such as the Dry Valleys
on continental Antarctica (see Ugolini, 1970).
ANTARCTIC MOSSES
Mosses (Plantae, Bryophyta) are a cosmopolitan group of simple, non-vascular plants that are present in many environments where there is an abundance of water for at least part of the year. Many species of moss are able to colonise extreme environments because they require little in the way of substrate or nutrients to grow. In the Antarctic continental zone, mosses [nine _ genera: Bryoerythrophyllum, Bryum, Ceratodon, Campylopus, Didymon, Grimmia, Plagiothecium, Pottia (= Hennediella) and Sarconeurum (Seppelt and Selkirk, 1984; Seppelt, 1986), within which there are thought to be 21 species (LewisSmith, 1997), however this number is under debate (Seppelt and Green, 1998)], along with liverworts are the highest forms of plant life to be found (Lewis-Smith,
1984). They create a very simple ecosystem that consists of no more than two o three tropic layers (they are a habitat for mites and springtails) and are to be found in areas as small as a few centimetres across (e.g. Block, 1984). The most
common species of mosses on continental Antarctica belong to the “silver”
(informal grouping, sensu Seppelt) Bryum species such as Bryum psuedotriquetrum (Hedw.) Gaertn., Meyer et Scherb., and B. subrotundifolium
Jaeg., which inhabit areas moistened by melt-water from glaciers and snow.
The genus Bryum Hedw. (Bryaceae) consists of a large group (194 species, Ochi, 1992) of cosmopolitan mosses with many species. All species exhibiting very similar morphological characters, and species are often only distinguished by close examination of the cellular structures of the leaves and capsules (see Cox, 1998, and Figure 1.3). Therefore, Bryum is a taxonomically problematic genus and has undergone much taxonomic revision (Ochi, 1979, 1992: Catcheside,
1980; Ochi and Ochyra, 1985; Cox, 1998), with debate over whether or not some of the present species assignments are valid, on both genetic and morphological bases (e.g. Adam et al., 1997; Seppelt and Green, 1998). The major difficulty with continental Antarctic Bryum taxa [17 species (Ochi, 1979; Ochi and Ochyra,
1985; Ochyra, and Ochi, 1986), more recently revised to two species (B. pseudotriquetrum and B. subrotundifolium), (Ochi, 1979; Kanda, 1981; Ochi and
Kanda, 1991; Seppelt and Green, 1998)] is the lack of field evidence for sporophytes on the plants collected (Horikawa and Ando, 1960; Steere, 1965; Ochi, 1979; Ochi and Ochyra, 1985; Ochyra, and Ochi, 1986). Sporophytes are essential in characterising moss species, as many different species or even genera can resemble each other on a purely vegetative basis (Greene, 1962). Ochi (1979) found, in particular, that it was not possible to distinguish Antarctic Bryum species
purely on vegetative characters; sexual organs were needed for identification.
Compounding the taxonomic problem is that many of the species are highly polymorphic in their characters, for example, B. pseudotriquetrum has two forms; dioicous and synoicous, which exhibit costa (Figure 1.3) that are slightly excurrent and long-excurrent respectively (Ochi, 1979) as well as variable leaf and stem structures. Additionally, characters can vary according to the age of the plant, and can be even more variable under extreme conditions such as those found in Antarctica (Ochi, 1979; Seppelt and Selkirk, 1984). For these reasons
Ochi (1979) recommends that classifications of Antarctic mosses be only made on specimens that have well developed stems and bear sexual organs, though this does not solve the problem of how to Classify samples that exhibit many
characters of a certain species, but can not be fully identified as no sporophytes
are present.
100 um
 
Figure 1.3 Taxonomic features of mosses. 1. Sporophyte from B. pallescens (a) seta (b) capsule (c) peristome teeth (d) operculum, 2. Leaf from B. subrotundifolium (a) nerve (costa) (b) lamina, 3. Lower lamina cells from B. psuedotriquetrum. (Adapted from Watson, 1968 and Seppelt and Green, 1998).
Species assignments within and around Antarctica have been debated almost since the first expeditions to collect mosses returned to lower latitudes. For example, Cardot (1908) questioned the number and assignments of taxa collected by Miiller in South Georgia (Greene, 1962). This position was exacerbated by the opinion then held by many bryologists, that each island must have its own individual species (Steere, 1965). More recent taxonomic investigations have found that this is not the case and have collapsed many of the taxa described by the original botanists into the several presently known species (Ochi, 1992). There is still, however, debate on which species are actually present, with taxonomic revisions continually taking place (e.g. Ochi, 1979, 1992; Ochyra and Ochi, 1986). For
example recent research has found that two morphologically similar species Closely related B. argenteum from New Zealand (Hunger, 2000), thus there has been little clarification of the status of the Antarctic B. argenteum/ subrotundifolium complex as no formal nomenclature changes have been put
forward. This conclusion was reached on the basis of comparison of sequence data of the ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA (nrDNA) for specimens that had been classified as either species from Antarctica
and comparing these with sequence data obtained from isotype specimens of
B. subrotundifolium and B. argenteum.
Dispersal and Colonisation
The absence of sporophytic structures on Bryum within Antarctica, has led to debate over the means of dispersal and colonisation events on the continent (e.g. Linskens et al., 1993; Marshall, 1996). It is presently thought that asexual structures such as gemmae have been the main means of dispersal within Antarctica (e.g. Steere, 1965), but nothing is known about the number of colonisation events from outside Antarctica, or indeed, how the first mosses are likely to have arrived (as spores or as asexual structures), a problem, the answers
to which may help elucidate the relationships among present-day populations.
Lewis-Smith (1984) states four reasons why sporophytes are unlikely to be found in any given region on continental Antarctica. Firstly, there is often wide spatial separation of unisexual plants in dioicous species (Longton and Greene, 1967). Secondly, there is an imbalance of male and female plants found within populations, frequently with either sex being entirely absent (Horikawa and Ando, 1967). Thirdly, the lack of liquid water at higher latitudes in Antarctica creates a physical barrier over which the male gametes cannot pass, thus the eggs within the archegonia are not fertilised and no sporophytes can develop (Steere, 1965). Fourthly, the Antarctic has a short duration growing season with cool temperatures, freeze-thaw activity and short photoperiod, causing inhibition of maturation of both sporophytes and gametangia (Clarke and Greene, 1970a, b). A fifth problem may be that the relatively cool air temperatures over the growing season mean that it is infrequent for the temperature to rise over freezing point for
more than 24 hours, a critical temperature for growth of plants. Soil temperatures, however, can stay close to or above 0°C for up to three months (Campbell and Claridge, 2000), which may in some cases aid the growth of mosses. Sporophytes have been observed on some of the sub-Antarctic islands and on the northern parts of the Antarctic Peninsula, where the growing season is longer and where liquid
water is present for much of the summer months; however these sporophytes have
not been on Bryum species.
The lack of evidence for sexual reproduction does not, however, indicate that there is no gene flow between populations on the continent as it has been observed that there are abundant propagules [gemmiferous axillary bulbils and stem apices (Seppelt and Green, 1998)] transported on wind currents (Lewis-Smith, 1997; M. I. Stevens, pers. comm.). The distances over which propagules can travel has not yet been investigated, so the extent of gene flow may be quite limited in some areas and extensive in others, depending on the prevailing wind and fresh water currents and the strength of the above. Thus, it can be hypothesised that the genetic similarity between moss populations will be correlated with geographical distance between populations, and other factors such as terrain, and prevailing wind and water currents. Lewis-Smith (1997) found such a pattern for several species (B. argenteum, Ceratodon purpureus, Encalypta patagonica, Tortula princeps) of moss dispersing from a central point (Seal carcass) on James Ross Island in relation to wind direction and melt-water streams (slope), but this patterns was also dependent on the type of structure being used for dispersal; E patagonica and T. princeps were dispersing by spore production and the pattern produced reflected wind as the major component, while B. argenteum and C. purpureus were dispersing using propagules, and the pattern produced reflected water dispersal. These experimental results are probably reflected by the size of the dispersing bodies, spores, being light are able to be dispersed by wind, and as the sporophytes are elevated in most cases, wind is likely to be the major vector for spores. Propagules on the other hand are larger and heavier, and thus less likely to be dispersed by wind, but are a suitable size to be carried by water currents. Skotnicki et al. (1997) also came to the conclusion that this was the case, at least for local dispersal, on the basis of higher levels of genetic similarity
between mosses from individual drainage channels, when compared to larger
areas and other drainage channels. Salt-water dispersal is an unlikely prospect, a eee ET
the salt content would kill the propagules, although rafting on sea ice is a
possibility.
In all species present in Antarctica, there have been observations of male and female structures on mosses, implying that the lack of sporophytes is not due to the lack of one sex or other, although this may be the case locally (Longton and Greene, 1967), but is rather due to the lack of fertilisation and due to the slow growth rate of the plants in Antarctica. It may also be that in dioicous species, such as B. subrotundifolium, spatial separation of individual clumps, which commonly show no genetic variation (Skotnicki et al., 1998b) and as such may be one individual genetically, means that the male gametes cannot fertilise the eggs of the female plants due to the spatial separation of the individual plants (clump to clump distance). If this is the case, the absence of sporophytes is due to the spatial separation of the male and female plants, not necessarily the habitat conditions of the mosses (Longton and Greene, 1967), although a situation like that would not be expected to be seen in areas where the ground is covered in a continuous turf, such as on Beaufort Island. van der Velde et al. (2001a) found that dispersal of male gametes in Polytrichum was possible upwards of 1.5 metres, although the conditions in which this species was studied were far less severe than those found in Antarctica, thus there was a higher chance of (relatively) long distance dispersal of the gametes in the area studied than in Antarctica. Longton and Greene (1967) found that fertilisation of female Polytrichum alpestre could take place over distances of up to 75 cm on South Georgia, but again these conditions are much less severe than those found on continental Antarctica. An interesting point of note is that mites and springtails along with other invertebrates have been observed carrying sperm of Polytrichum commune in temperate-climate populations (Wyatt and Derda, 1997), thus it is possible that this could also occur
in the Antarctic where mites and springtails are commonly found among mosses.
Genetic Variation in Mosses
Mosses form small patches or turfs of dense shoots that can usually be assumed to be from one plant, but occasionally will have more than one species in the same turf (pers. obs.). Previous studies of population genetics on Antarctic mosses
have detected variation based on geographic location, though the levels of
variation were low (25%) when compared to the within population variation,
 which accounted for 75% of the variation seen (Skotnicki et al., 1998a). However, these figures depend on the size of the region defined as containing a population (Skotnicki et al., 1998a). Skotnicki et al. (1998a, b, c) performed Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) analyses on adjacent shoots from a single turf and found that there was resolvable genetic variation between shoots, a discovery that implies very slow growth rates and long establishment of the individual moss turfs. However, Hunger et al., (In Prep.) found that this observed variation may have been due to fungal contamination of some shoots and not others. Fungal hyphae are essentially inseparable from the moss shoots found in Antarctica, due to the small size and high abundance of the fungi. It has been observed that a large proportion of moss samples from Antarctica, when taken back to room temperature environments, will rapidly develop obvious signs of fungal growth (pers. obs.), and signs of fungal growth on mosses have been observed in the field (Longton, 1973; T. G. A. Green, pers. comm., Figure 1.4). This abundance of fungi has made it very difficult to extract DNA from Antarctic moss samples without also extracting fungal DNA contaminants simultaneously, creating the need for moss-specific probes such as microsatellite markers as less specific methods (e.g. RAPDs) are prone to amplifying contaminant DNA as well
as the DNA from the organism being studied, creating misleading results.
 
Figure 1.4 Fungal growth rings on Antarctic Ceratodon purpureus (Photograph: T. G. A. Green)
Temperate-boreal populations of the moss Messia triquetra have been found to have higher levels of genetic diversity than those from sub-Arctic and high Arctic
populations, this was attributed to the higher frequency of sexual reproductio found in boreal regions (Montagnes et al., 1993). A similar situation may exist
 
for Antarctic species, where the frequency of sexual reproduction is low (Steere,
1965; Horikawa and Ando, 1967; Ochi, 1979; Ochi and Ochyra, 1985; Ochyra, and Ochi, 1986; Seppelt, 1986) compared to that found in temperate regions, such
as New Zealand or Australia, and the levels of genetic variation in Antarctica have
been found to be low compared to Australia and New Zealand (Skotnicki et al.,
1997).
Genetic variation in bryophytes, has until recently, been studied solely by the use of isozyme electrophoresis to determine the genetic structure of populations and the geographical variation. In general the findings have been that bryophytes are not genetically depauperate, instead they show levels of isozyme variability comparable to those found in vascular plants (Stoneburner et al., 1991 Daniels, 1993), however van der Velde and Bijlsma (2000) found significantly lower levels of genetic variation in Polytrichum, using isozyme analysis. This disparity in the figures seen over different studies could be due to a number of different causes, but is probably due to the variety of modes of reproduction and the haploid life style. Life history and habitat probably play a large part in this, in that some types of habitat are more conducive to clonal reproduction, while others will encourage sexual reproduction (van der Velde and Bilsma, 2000). The mode of reproduction affects the genetic variability in that if the population is reproducing asexually, then it is essentially cloning itself, thus introducing no variation into the genome. Sexual reproduction on the other hand, results in genetic variation being introduced at the meiotic stage of gamete formation, which is then dispersed by
the diploid parent (sporophyte) through the production of spores.
Genetic variation within B. argenteum (sensu lato, referred to B. subrotundifolium after Seppelt and Green, 1998, for Antarctic material) from Antarctica, New Zealand and Australia, has been investigated through the used of RAPD markers by Skotnicki et al., (1998a), they found that 19% of the variation seen occurred between the Antarctica group and Australia and New Zealand as a single group, 7% of the variation occurred between the Australian and New Zealand populations and 75% of the total variation occurred within the populations. Within-clump variation has been observed, in the form of varying RAPD banding
patterns produced by samples of Antarctic B. pseudotriquetrum (Skotnicki 1998b). However, the levels of genetic variability were such that some samples
from distant populations (over 40 km apart) were found to produce identical
RAPD profiles, a situation which either indicates that there is long distance
dispersal, or that the high level of genetic variation within clumps, seen in these
samples are an artifact due to some unknown cause.
VEGETATION ORIGINS
There are two theories about the present-day vegetation of continental Antarctica. The first postulates that bryophytes could have survived the LGM in remote refugia (i.e. that the present-day populations are relict from a more extensive vegetations) such as nunataks, coastal areas (Llano, 1965) and areas warmed by volcanic activity (Broady et al., 1987). Many species of bryophytes have been found in geothermally heated areas within Antarctica including species that are known to be cold-intolerant (e.g. Campylopus pyriformis (Schultz) Brid., see
Broady et al., 1987), thus there is some evidence that there are likely to have been
refugia at the LGM.
The second theory postulates that the present-day vegetation is entirely due to recent invasion from sites that were outside the area influenced by the LGM (i.e. from outside continental Antarctica, including New Zealand, Australia and South America). This theory is supported by evidence that shows there was little, if any, land that was not covered by glaciers, on the continent, even some islands in the vicinity of the continent have been shown to have been completely covered by ice at this time (Holdgate, 1967). In debate of this, Llano (1965), referring to lichens, was of the opinion that it was not possible for some of the slower breeding endemic species to have evolved in such a short space of time. Castello and Nimis (1997) also state “The lichen flora of Antarctica, and especially of continental Antarctica, is a young one, which mainly originated during the quaternary period by long distance dispersal”. This recent statement suggests that other components of the Antarctic flora are also likely to have arrived by similar mechanisms. Another piece of evidence supporting the recent arrival of the flora, is that studies on bryophytes have shown that there is little, if any, difference between Antarctic mosses and temperate species in terms of the relationship between net photosynthesis and temperature, whereas Arctic mosses have lower
temperature optima (Convey, 1997) for both respiration and photosynthesis ‘ ~ 2 ued uli’® J
bce VY Chapter 1 Introduction
ae ———sntroduction— supposedly due to the longer adaptation time the Arctic species have had. It has
been pointed out, however that even with complete glaciation, large peaks near the coast would have been exposed, if the plasticity of the ice is such that the gradient on the ice sheet is 1:100 or less, making this a potential site for refugia (Dahl, 1946). It is likely, however, that neither hypothesis represents the
complete story, rather that the present-day vegetation is likely to be a combination
of all of the above (see Lamb, 1970).
MICROSATELLITE MARKERS
An Introduction
Microsatellites, sometimes known as simple sequence repeats (SSR) or short tandem repeats (STR) are a class of repeat sequences known as variable number tandem repeats (VNTR), which also includes minisatellites (Nakamura et al., 1987). These markers consist of tandem repeats in the DNA sequence, such as CACACACA (denoted (CA),, where n is the number of repeats), which are highly variable in length and are distributed randomly about the genome (Bruford and Wayne, 1993; Lagercrantz et al., 1993; Morgante and Olivieri, 1993; Armour et al., 1994). This means they can be used effectively as genetic markers for DNA profiling (Litt and Luty, 1989; Tautz, 1989; Weber and May, 1989). The composition of microsatellites ranges from mono- to hexanucleotide motifs that can be repeated many times (Schlotterer and Pemberton, 1998), usually with n < 60 (Akkaya et al., 1992). Microsatellites can be classed into three different types of repeat sequence; |) pure, where the sequence consists of only the repeat unit e.g. CAGCAGCAG; 2) compound, where there are two repeat sequences joined end to end e.g. CAGCAGCAGTGTGTGTG; 3) imperfect, where the repeat sequence is interrupted by a_ non-repetitive unit such as
CAGCAGCAGCTTAGCAGCAGCAG (Weber, 1990; Rosenbaum and Deinard, 1998).
Each microsatellite marker can, depending on the repeat length, have up to 20 alleles and be up to approximately 150 base pairs (bp) in length (Schlétterer and Pemberton, 1994), however Primmer et al. 1996 reported examples of large, polymorphic microsatellites in swallows and Nybom et al. (1992) even larger alleles in box elder. As microsatellites are codominantly inherited and usually
selectively neutral, they are ideally suited to population genetic analyses (Ashley
) and Dow, 1994; Schlotterer and Pemberton, 1994) if suitable primers can be
 
developed.
The abundance of microsatellite markers in the genome is variable according to the type of organism being studied. For example, they are almost non-existent in prokaryotes, but are found at an abundance of one every 10-15 kb (kilobase pairs) in higher plants (Barrier et al., 2000) and even more abundantly in mammals and insects (Lagercrantz et al., 1993; Van Treuren et al., 1997). It has been found that the most frequently typed microsatellites in plants are of the (AT), type (Morgante and Olivieri, 1993; Gupta et al., 1996; McCouch et al., 1997). Other forms of microsatellite repeat (both sequence difference and length) are also found in plants, but at a lesser abundance (Lagercrantz et al., 1993). There is also variation in the frequency of microsatellite sequences among groups of plants, for example Wang et al. (1994) and Gupta et al. (1996) found that there was a higher frequency of microsatellites in monocotyledons than in eudicotyledons. Levels of
polymorphism also vary among both genus and type of microsatellite, for example
Condit and Hubbell (1991) found that Piper and Zea had five to ten fold fewer (AC), and (AG), sites than other genera (Malmea, Virola, Trophis, Poulsenia), while Bell and Ecker (1994) found that (CA), microsatellite loci were mostly uninformative (non-polymorphic) in Arabidopsis thaliana, and that (GA), loci were much more informative (polymorphic). However, these data are restricted to
a few plant groups and as such may not be applicable to other plant groups.
Microsatellite DNA markers are largely species specific but can often be used in closely related taxa (Strassmann et al., 1996) though not normally above the genus level. Despite this, in the literature, there are examples of amplification at the family level (in Leguminosae and Myrtaceae) using the same primers, (Dayanandan et al., 1997; Rossetto et al., 2000). The specificity of the primers used in microsatellite DNA analysis reduces the chance of amplifying contaminant DNA from unrelated organisms. For example, previous RAPD analyses of Antarctic mosses have shown that they have extremely high levels of genetic variation (Skotnicki et al., 1998a, b, c), however recent studies have shown that the variation is likely to have been over-estimated due to fungal contamination (Hunger, 2000). This gives microsatellite markers an advantage
over other methods of analysis such as RAPDs that are prone to amplifying targe and contaminant DNA alike, but is disadvantaged by the time and expense spent
 
in developing these markers.
Microsatellite Polymorphism
Variations in microsatellite sequence (length polymorphism), causing new alleles to be generated for a particular marker, are thought to occur through slippage
mechanisms (Levinson and Gutman, 1987; Gaggiotti et al., 1999), such as slipped
strand mis-pairing of complementary bases in a repeat sequence during DNA replication, resulting in the insertion or deletion of whole repeat units each time this occurs (Levinson and Gutman, 1987). However, this scenario does not seem to occur all the time, and other mechanisms of change have been recently proposed (Ellegren, 2000; Sibly et al., 2001). The mutation rate of microsatellite loci has been estimated to be in the order of 10° per locus per generation (Weber and Wong, 1993; Jarne and Lagoda, 1996), which is one of the higher mutation
rates observed at molecular loci (Goldstein and Pollock, 1998), however these rates were estimated from sequences found in humans and Drosophila melanogaster, and as such may not be transferable to plants. It has been found that one of the most important factors in the rate of microsatellite mutation is the length of the locus, indeed a directly proportional relationship has been shown to exist between the average repeat number and degree of length polymorphism (Weber, 1990). This relationship indicates that longer alleles mutate more rapidly than short alleles, a fact that bears up the slippage-mechanism model of microsatellite allele mutation, through the fact that a longer sequence with more repeat units is more likely to have a slippage occur at any one of the repeats (Ellegren, 2000). It has been found that the degree of polymorphism is related to the length of the microsatellite with variability being very low in microsatellites of less than 10 repeats in length (Beckmann and Weber, 1992; Ashley and Dow, 1994). A microsatellite that is highly polymorphic in one species may be monomorphic or even entirely absent from a closely related species, as the levels
of polymorphism and frequency of microsatellites have been found to vary widely
among different genera (Condit and Hubbell, 1991; Bell and Ecker, 1994 Wang et al., 1994; Gupta et al., 1996).
Evolution of microsatellites is thought to follow either of two main models: the
infinite allele model (IAM), or the stepwise mutation model (SMM) (se Rosenbaum and Deinard, 1998). Both models are based around the strand
 
slippage model of DNA mutation (Schlétterer and Tautz, 1992). The LAM
postulates that any allele generated through mutation will be completely different
from any other allele that has been discovered. This model, along with a closely related model, the k-allele model (KAM), in which the new alleles can occupy k pre-existing states, has been found to be problematic as the assumptions implicit in the model are violated by the high rate of mutation found in microsatellite loci and by the assumption of the KAM that prior allelic states are non-existent, a situation that is not always true in microsatellite studies (Slatkin, 1995). The SMM states that the there are no constraints on allele size and that the mutation process does not depend on allele size, with an equal probability of addition and deletion occurring. These assumptions have been shown to be violated (Takezaki and Nei, 1996) in that the longer the sequence, the more likely it is to mutate via slippage mechanisms (Weber, 1990), and that alleles seem to have a maximum size of approximately 100 repeats (Tautz, 1993), with some notable exceptions such as Huntington’s disease. Finally, there appears to be some bias towards additions rather than deletions in some loci and vice versa at other loci (Primmer et al., 1996). None of these models completely describe the observed mutation patterns found in microsatellite sequences, in particular that they do not follow a simple stepwise model. New models are being postulated, most of which are based around Markov chain models (Kruglyak et al., 1998). Sibly et al. (2001) used maximum likelihood methods to calculate parameters for models based on Markov chain methods and some earlier models, such as the slippage models, and found that a “full” model, where parameters are fitted for each microsatellite length, described the rate and evolution of microsatellites better than the older
methods, which tended to have limited ability to predict events in the evolution of
very small and very large microsatellite alleles.
Microsatellites and Mosses
The evidence for microsatellites in mosses is sparse, however in recent years there have been several papers describing microsatellite studies in mosses, especially for the genus Polytrichum (van der Velde et al., 2000). Subsequent work by the same authors has produced studies on the genetic structure, reproductive biology and mating systems of moss species within this genus. Their findings are that
there is some genetic variation between populations over both large- (200 km + and small- (1-2 m) scale population studies. In particular, van der Velde et al. (2001b), found that on a large geographical scale, sexual reproduction is the more important factor in the genetic structure of P. formosum. These findings have been in mosses from in temperate regions, where sexual reproduction is common, thus they may not apply to the situation in the continental Antarctic, where sexual reproduction is the exception rather than the rule (Longton, 1985). It is possible however that most of the populations of mosses in Antarctica are the result of long distance dispersal from areas outside Antarctica (South America, Australia, New
Zealand, South Africa), and that they are genetically heterogeneous due to many
colonisation events from some or all of these localities.
The abundance of microsatellites in mosses has never been fully investigated. The majority of investigations of microsatellites in mosses have been in the genus Polytrichum, where it was found that the percent of polymorphic loci (P) were amongst the lowest (48.8%) found for any plant group (usual range 80 — 100%), and that the mean number of alleles at a locus (a) was also substantially lower (2.8) than found in other plant groups (range: 4.7 — 16.2) (van der Velde et al., 2001b). When the monomorphic loci were removed from these data, the levels of microsatellite variability were still low (P = 90.6%, a = 4.3), but much closer to the range of data found amongst other plant groups (van der Velde et al., 2001b). How applicable these data are to other plants groups or indeed other mosses is debatable, as it has been found that there are often large differences in
microsatellite frequency and polymorphism between different groups of plants
(Condit and Hubbell, 1991; Wang et al., 1994; Gupta et al., 1996) CHAPTER 2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
 
INTRODUCTION
As this project is an experimental development of microsatellite markers in mosses for use in clarifying the population genetic structure of Antarctic moss
populations, the materials and methods chapter will also include some discussion
on why various methods were attempted.
FIELD COLLECTIONS
Population-level samples of mosses, representing Bryum and Hennediella (= Pottia) were collected from the Ross Sea Region of Antarctica and New Zealand (Appendix 1, Figure 2.1) over the 2000 and 2001 Antarctic summer seasons at six different localities, these were; Beaufort Island, Cape Bird and Miers Valley in 2000 and Cape Crozier, Granite Harbour and Marble Point in 2001. The samples collected included Bryum_ subrotundifolium Jaeg., Bryum psuedotriquetrum (Hedw.) Gaertn., Meyer et Scherb., and Hennediella heimii (Hedw.) [=Pottia heimii (Hedw.) Hampe]. In total 765 samples (Appendix 1) were collected from Antarctica, consisting of 192 populations of three different species (Table 2.1). Antarctic samples that were otherwise comparable to B. argenteum were classified as B. subrotundifolium following Seppelt and Green (1998) in their reduction of the Bryum species within continental Antarctica to two: Bryum subrotundifolium and Bryum psuedotriquetrum. These two species are quite distinct when found in the field based on leaf apex shape, size and colour of the leaves, and nerve characteristics; B. subrotundifolium has small silvery-yellow leaves, a rotund to subrotund leaf apex and a nerve failing before the leaf point (Seppelt and Selkirk, 1984; Seppelt and Green, 1998). B. pseudotriquetrum, on the other hand has larger leaves, with a darker green colour and long tapering, slightly toothed leaf apices and a nerve that reaches or fails just below the apex (Watson, 1968). Of these, both species can be confused with others; B. pseudotriquetrum is very similar to Hennediella heimii (= Pottia heimii), another common species in Antarctica, while B. subrotundifolium closely resembles B. argenteum, with small silvery-green leaves, rotund to acuminate leaf apices and a nerve that fails in or
before the apex. B. argenteum is a cosmopolitan species which was previousl thought to be present in Antarctica, though the work of some authors recently has
classified all Antarctic specimens of this type as B. subrotundifolium (Seppelt and Green, 1998), despite the two distinct morphotypes, one of which is very similar
to B. argenteum, found at various localities (Hunger, 2000).
Specimens of H. heimii were also collected from Antarctica, this species is relatively easy to identify in the field as it has a darker greenish-brown, shading to reddish-brown coloration and finely denticulate apices on the leaves, the nerve
fails in or shortly below the apex (Seppelt and Green, 1998).
A total of 70 populations and 393 samples were collected for Bryum (Table 2.1).
Collections followed the classification of Seppelt and Green (1998), in reducing
the Bryum species within Antarctica to two.
Seven samples from one population were also collected from New Zealand these
were of the species B. argenteum (Hedw.) and were collected for purposes of
development of the microsatellite markers.
 
Figure 2.1 Map of the Ross Is., South Victoria Land region showing locations of collection sites, marked by dots. Left to right: Granite Harbour, Marble Point, Miers Valley, Cape Bird, Beaufort Is., Cape Crozier. Reproduced from NZMS 135 Ross Sea Regions 2™ Edition, Department of Lands and Survey New
Zealand.
 The size of each sample collected was dependent on the abundance of moss in the locality; generally samples were approximately two centimetres in diameter, but frequently smaller. Samples were obtained using a cork borer or a pocketknife. All sampling sites were refilled with gravel or sand to prevent the exposed surfaces drying out and the rest of the moss patch dying. Individual samples were identified by location, species and sample number (Appendix 1), for example; sample “MV 10/1 BS’ would be from Miers Valley (Dry Valleys, continental Antarctica), population ten, sample one, and is the species Bryum subrotundifolium. Samples were collected into labelled paper bags and left to dry at room temperature. The number of samples taken from a population also depended on the size of the population, and ranged from 1 to 52 (see Appendix 1). Field data recorded included preliminary species identification, site locations, descriptions of the sites, as well as other details such as abundance and condition of mosses in the area, presence of algae, and other species in the same area. When possible each population was also given a GPS (global positioning system) location, however for some localities in 2000 no GPS signal was available and in
the 2001 season this was not possible as no GPS unit was available.
Samples were stored at room temperature to dry to completion. The identification of the sample was then verified and a portion for genetic analyses was placed into a plastic bag. Plastic bags were labelled with sample accession numbers (see
below) and this number was also written on a small card and placed in the bag with the sample. Samples were then stored at —76°C until required. The
remaining portion of each specimen was lodged at the University of Waikato
herbarium (WAIK).
Permits to collect in Antarctica were obtained from Antarctica New Zealand (under permit numbers 99/053 and 00/008) under the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act, 1994. Approval was obtained for entry to SSSI (Site of Special Scientific Interest) No. 10 (Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island), SSSI No. 4 (Cape Crozier) and SSSI No. 37 (Granite Harbour, Victoria Land) and to SPA (Specially Protected Area) No. 20 (New College Valley, Cape Bird, Ross Island) and SPA No. 5 (Beaufort Island), Conditions made upon granting approval were followed. All samples were imported to New Zealand under MAF permit numbers
1998004318, 1999007502 and 200010764 and stored in a transitional containmen eee RAND ENS AE WICH ©
facility.
Table 2.1 Moss collections sorted by population and number of samples within a
 
Locality Species # of populations # of Samples Beaufort Island B. subrotundifolium 5 99 A. heimii 1 I Cape Bird B. subrotundifolium 19 110 B. pseudotriquetrum 3 66 AA. heimii 9 46 Cape Crozier B. subrotundifolium 9 23 Granite Harbour B. subrotundifolium 7 23 B. pseudotriquetrum 2 2 Marble Point B. subrotundifolium 5 21 A, heimii 7 38 Miers Valley B. subrotundifolium 24 110 B. pseudotriquetrum 6 24 H. heimii 95 202 Hamilton, NZ B. argenteum l 7 Totals 193 772
Samples were collected in 2000 by S. A. Hunger, R. D. Seppelt and the author. 2001 collections were by C. E. C. Gemmill, C. Beard and the author.
PROTOCOLS AND REAGENTS
Protocols for making solutions, including ratios and concentrations of solutions, and other materials used in the laboratory work are found in Appendix 2, along
with equations useful for making the above. Lists of chemicals and supplies used
are also included under this appendix.
GENOMIC DNA EXTRACTION
The protocol of Rogers and Bendich (1985) was chosen as the extraction protocol for this project because of its simplicity and high yield, also the small preparation size enables a relatively high number of samples to be extracted at one time (upwards of 30). In many respects it is similar to many other extraction procedures, in that it uses CTAB buffers to lyse cells and disrupt the cell membranes and C:I extractions to denature and remove proteins and other material before the DNA is precipitated and purified (Murray and Thompson, 1980). However, this procedure has been designed and proven to work on small
amounts of tissue and provides instructions for the optimisation of the yield. The
precipitation of the DNA is performed in ethanol at -20°C, this has been shown t precipitate DNA at concentrations as low as 20 ng mL”, such that it can be
recovered quantitatively by centrifugation (Sambrook et al., 1989).
The main difficulty with extraction of DNA from plants is the high polysaccharide content of the cells. The polysaccharides make up the majority of the cell wall and as sugars, are often co-extracted with the DNA (Porebski et al., 1997). This problem, along with the tendency of secondary compounds, such as polyphenolics, to co-precipitate with the DNA is often a major problem in DNA extraction and further use of the DNA, such as PCR, which can be inhibited by these compounds (Li et al., 1994). Often it is necessary to remove these
compounds by further extraction of the stock DNA. Mosses are simple plants,
producing little in the way of secondary compounds, and having a simple cell wall
structure. For this reason the extraction of DNA is relatively simple from these plants, and the DNA obtained is usually “clean” in that it contains little in the way
of polysaccharides or secondary compounds.
Extraction of total DNA from all moss samples followed a modified Rogers and Bendich protocol, (1985). Approximately 100 mg of shoot tissue was mixed with liquid nitrogen in a mortar to freeze the tissue. The frozen tissue was then ground with a chilled pestle and transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube using a spatula chilled in liquid nitrogen. After the tissue had thawed, approximately one microlitre of 65°C 1x CTAB extraction buffer per milligram of tissue was added. If not all the tissue was moistened, more extraction buffer was added. This
mixture was then incubated at 65°C for three minutes. Removal of cellular debris
and proteins was performed by the addition of 1.5 volumes of chloroform: isoamyl alcohol (C:I) and the solution mixed by shaking thoroughly for one minute. Separation of the aqueous and organic phases was carried out by centrifugation at 11000 times gravity (G) for 30 seconds (s) on an Eppendorf 5415 D bench-top centrifuge. The aqueous phase was removed and placed in a new tube, taking care
not to disturb the layer of tissue and protein between the two liquid phases. One tenth of the aqueous volume of 65°C 10% CTAB buffer was added and the C:I extraction repeated once. One volume (~100 wl) of CTAB precipitation buffer was added and mixed gently by pipetting, followed by centrifugation for five
minutes at 11000 G, after which the pellet was re-hydrated in 1x STE buffer After re-hydration, the DNA was precipitated with two volumes (~200 wl) of
-20°C, 95% ethanol and pelleted by ten minutes of centrifugation at 11000 G. The
Once dry, the pellet was re-suspended in Milli-Q water (20 - 50 uL, depending on the size of the pellet) and RNA digested with one hundredth the volume of
10 mg mL" Ribonuclease A (Sigma) by incubation at 37°C for one hour.
Ribonuclease A was deactivated by heating the tubes to 65°C for 5 minutes. Two to five microlitres of DNA was electrophoresed on a 1.5% agarose gel in 1x TBE buffer, containing 0.1 ng mL ethidium bromide (Appendix 3), to determine the quality of each DNA sample. Gels were visualized on an EagleEye II gel documentation system running EagleSight® software, version 3.2 (Stratagene) using ultra-violet light as a fluorescent source. DNA concentrations in each sample were determined using 100, 50, 25 and 10 ng uncut A virus DNA
(Life Technologies) as concentration standards, allowing a fluorimetric
approximation of DNA concentration following the Saran™ wrap method of
Sambrook et al. (1989).
The use of a Hoefer DNA fluorometer (Hoefer Scientific Instruments) and GeneQuant II (Pharmacia Biotech) with a 5 wL cuvette, were also investigated for
estimating DNA concentrations.
FUNGAL DETECTION Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS)
For the development of Bryum specific microsatellite markers it is essential that sample DNA is free of contaminating DNA from other organisms, so as to be absolutely certain that the markers developed are found in the taxon being
investigated. If the DNA is contaminated, the markers developed may give false results, in that the patterns established may not be those for the group being investigated, instead they may be microsatellite sequences of the contaminant organism. Previous work by Hunger (2000) established that DNA extracted from Antarctic moss samples were often contaminated by fungal DNA, thus it was
necessary to develop methods by which sample DNA could be screened for th contaminants. The presence or absence of fungal contaminants in extracted DNA was established by two methods: The first method used was PCR amplification of the ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA from the extracted moss samples. An indication of the presence of fungi contamination was taken as the presence of a second band of DNA of approximately 550 bp in length when the products were visualised on the gels after electrophoresis (Figure 2.2). That this was likely to be a band from fungal contaminants was established by Hunger (2000) through extraction and sequencing of this band and then performing a BLAST (basic local alignment search _ tool,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) search for sequence similarity. Through cultivation of fungi from moss samples and amplifying the ITS region from these
samples, and comparing sequence information between the extracted band and the
cultivated samples it was possible to determine the origin of the contaminant.
ITS regions are non-coding parts of the nuclear ribosomal DNA, found between
the exons of the ribosomal genes. The ITS regions are situated between the 18S
and the 5.8S ribosomal genes (ITS1) and the 5.8S and the 26S genes (ITS2) (Baldwin, 1992). ITS 1 and 2 are mutated at a defined rate, but are surrounded by highly conserved genes (ribosomal genes), making them ideal markers for genetic studies in plants, as primers anchored in the ribosomal genes will allow amplification of the ITS regions in almost any organism (Hamby and Zimmer, 1992). The size of the ITS amplification product depends on the length of the spacer regions and is consistent within species. As the ITS sequence amplified by the “ITS4” and “ITSSHP” primers (White et al., 1990) overlaps the 5.8S
ribosomal gene, this conserved region within the marker can be used as an
alignment tool to arrange sequences before analysis (Baldwin et al., 1995)
The contaminant was first seen as two bands (Figure 2.2) on a gel of an ITS-PCR
product, isolation and sequencing of some of these bands led to the identification of this as a product of the ITS region of any one of three fungal species: Phoma
glomerata, Ampelomyces humuli or A. quercinus (97% sequence homology), though subsequent morphological identification of fungal cultures isolated from
Antarctic moss samples led to the characterisation of these specimens as Phoma
sp., thought to be Phoma herbarum Westend. (Hunger 2000) 
 
Figure 2.2 ITS products showing the multiple bands characteristic of
ontamination of the DNA. Lane marked “‘L” contains 0.3 ug 100 bp ladder (New sngland Biolabs), band sizes in base pairs are marked next to the ladder. Lane 1 -ontains an un-contaminated Antarctic moss sample (SH 16 BA), lanes 2 and 3 -ontain contaminated Antarctic moss samples (SH 21 BA, SH34 BS), note bands narked by arrows, lane 4 contains a New Zealand moss sample (HR 1/2 BA) with 10 fungal contaminant, and lane 5 contains amplified fungal DNA. Lanes 6 and 7 -ontain positive (Pittosporum cornifolium) and negative controls respectively.
?CR conditions for the ITS analyses were as follows for a 50uL reaction: 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1.0 uM each of ITS4 and ITSSHP primer (Life Technologies), 0.15 mM zach dNTP (Boehringer Mannheim), 1.0 U Tag DNA Polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim and Roche), with five microlitres of DNA at between 4 and 36 ng BL". -ycling parameters were as follows for an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient hermocycler; 96°C for 5 minutes, followed by 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 55°C ‘or 30 s, and 72°C for 45 s, final extension was performed at 72°C for 10 minutes. Reactions were then held at 4°C. PCR products were visualised on 1.5% agarose
zels (Appendix 3) in 1x TBE buffer, on an EagleEye DNA visualisation system
Stratagene) as in DNA extraction.
Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
The second method used to screen mosses for contamination was using RAPD ‘Randomly Amplified Polymorphic DNA) primers in a RAPD-PCR (Figure 2.3). This technique involves the use of arbitrary primers, ten bases in length, >omposed of 60-70% G or C, to amplify random regions of the genome. The
‘ragments (bands) produced are visualised using electrophoresis on either a ees Materials and Methods polyacrylamide or an agarose gel. It has been proven that the majority of
polymorphic RAPD bands are dominantly inherited (Clark and Lanigan, 1993)
and can be assumed to follow Mendelian segregation (Williams et al., 1990),
although it would appear that some alleles do not (Grosberg et al., 1996). The
mode of inheritance and Mendelian segregation makes RAPD analysis a highly
useful tool for studies of population genetics.
Observed banding patterns were compared with banding patterns from known fungal contaminants and with moss samples of the same species that are known to be free of fungal DNA. The observed banding patterns were not completely what was expected, it was found that the samples with fungal contaminants were without some bands that were present in the un-contaminates samples. It had
been expected that the two banding patterns (fungal and moss) would show the
total bands from each of these species.
PCR conditions were: 2.0 mM MgCl, 0.1 UM each of dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP (Boehringer Mannheim), 1.5 4M primer (Operon Technologies Inc., Kit A) and
0.5 U Taq DNA Polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim and Roche) in a total reaction volume of 25 uL. Two and a half microlitres of DNA (concentrations ranging between 4.0 and 36.0 ng uL”') were added per reaction. Amplification was carried out on an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient thermocycler, using the following cycling parameters; 94°C for 3 minutes followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 1 minute, 45°C for 1 minute and 72°C for 2 minutes, and a final extension of 72°C for ten minutes after which the reactions were held at 4°C until they were loaded onto a gel. PCR products were visualised on a 1.5% agarose gel
(Appendix 3) in 1x TBE buffer. Using the EagleEye DNA visualisation system
above.
Amplification of these samples was problematic in that the samples had different optimal annealing temperatures with the primers used, thus experimentation to
determine the best temperature at which to perform the PCR was necessary. This
was carried out using the gradient function on an Eppendorf MasterCycler
Gradient thermocycler, with the gradient set to 36 + 10°C. It was found that this
temperature was 36°C, as per Williams et al. (1990). However, note the fain DNA.
 
Figure 2.3 RAPD banding pattern produced by three Antarctic samples, a fungal sample and a combined moss and fungal sample. Note band in negative control
(lane 7). Lanes 1 — 6 contain samples SH 16 BA, SH 27-2 BS, SH 23-1 BS, Fungal extract, Spiked, and positive control (Pittosporum cornifolium). Lane
marked L contains 0.05 tug 100 bp ladder (New England Biolabs).
MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT
Experimental protocols followed those outlined in Glenn (2001), as closely as possible, with exceptions made for DNA extraction as the original protocol gives instructions for extraction of animal DNA as opposed to plant DNA. Variations
were also made for competent cell preparation and for probing.
In general, the procedure for development of the microsatellites followed Figure 2.4. A more detailed description of the protocol is given below as the main body
of the text. This also includes work that was not completed during the study.
 Extract total DNA.
Prepare insert DNA (Bryum argenteum) by digestion with Dpn II and size select. Prepare vector (pBluescript KS® +) by digestion with BamHI.
Ligate size-selected DNA into plasmid vector using T4 DNA ligase.
 
    
Heat shock transform XL-1 Blue competent cells
Screen (white) colonies for putative positive clones via hybridization with ~~P 
labelled microsatellite probes
Screen putative positive clones for microsatellites via dot blots
V
Isolate plasmids with microsatellite repeat inserts
Generate ssDNA (single stranded DNA) containing microsatellites from overnight cultures infected with hel
 
Sequence plasmid inserts using M13 universal primers
Design primers for microsatellite sequences
Screen populations for variation
Score Loci and Analyse Data
|
Figure 2.4 Flowchart of microsatellite development steps.
Genomic DNA Preparation and Size Selection
DNA was size selected for microsatellite development so as to be able to increase the efficiency of the protocol, this involved the extraction of the 300 — 700 bp
region of the genomic DNA after digestion with a restriction enzyme.
For microsatellite development, specimens of New Zealand Bryum argenteum
were used, as these were found to have no fungal contamination. DNA wa extracted as above from six New Zealand moss samples (HR 1/1 BA, HR 1/2 BA, HR 2/1 BA, HR 2/2 BA, HR 3/1 BA, HR 3/2 BA) and quantified on a Hoefer
DNA Fluorometer (Hoefer Scientific Instruments). Extractions were then tested
for the presence of fungal contaminants using PCR amplification of the ITS
region.
 
Figure 2.5 Digested Bryum argenteum DNA from samples HR 2/1 BA and HR
3/2 BA. Lanes marked “L” contain 0.3 pg 100 bp ladder (Life Technologies), band increments around the 600 bp band are in 100 bp sizes. The region 300-700
bp in length of the digested DNA was excised and extracted from the gel for use in the ligation step.
Those extractions with high (20-70 ng uL") DNA concentrations (HR 1/2 BA, HR 2/1 BA, HR 2/2 BA, HR 3/2 BA) were digested using Dpn II restriction
enzyme (New England Biolabs) to completion (approximately one hour), using a
50 uL reaction volume containing 1x Dpn II restriction buffer (10 mM MgCl), | mM dithiothreitol, final concentrations), 20 U Dpn I, and 2 ug DNA. Digested DNA was electrophoresed on a 1.5% agarose gel with 0.3 ug of a 100 bp (base
pair) ladder (Life Technologies) as a size standard in a separate lane, until separation of the DNA was seen (Figure 2.5). The 300-700 bp region was excised from the gel, keeping UV exposure to an absolute minimum. Extraction of the
DNA from the gel slices was performed using a gel extraction kit (Life Technologies, Concert™ Gel Extraction Systems) and the DNA re-suspended in
25 wL 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0), quantified and diluted to make a concentration of 25 ng L' in 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0) produced by the restriction of the genomic DNA, this allows the vector and the
genomic DNA to bind together, re-circularising the vector and enabling it to be
taken up by a bacterium.
The vector used was a pBluescript KS® + (Stratagene) phagemid vector. Ten
micrograms of vector were prepared as follows: Ten micrograms of vector were restricted with 100 units (U) of BamHI (Roche)
with 1x BamHI restriction buffer (10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl, 1 mM B-mercaptoethanol, final concentrations) in a total reaction volume of 100 UL.
The digestion reaction was incubated at 37°C for 3 hours. Two microlitres of digested vector were electrophoresed on a 1.0% agarose gel, and visualised using
UV light at 312 nm. Because no-uncut vector was observed, dephosphorylation
of the vector was carried out. Five microlitres of shrimp alkaline phosphatase (SAP, Roche) was used to dephosphorylate the remaining (95 wL) vector by incubation at 37°C for | hour. One hundred microlitres of 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0)
was then added and the solution was extracted once with P:C:I (25:24:1, Sigma) [by adding one volume of P:C:I, mixing, centrifuging at Gmax (13000 G) for
1 minute, then removing the aqueous layer to a new tube., and twice with C:1.
Twenty microlitres of 3.0 M sodium acetate (NaOAc) and 450 wL of —20°C, 95%
ethanol were then added to the aqueous solution. This was then mixed gently by
inversion and incubated at -20°C for 30 minutes. To pellet the DNA the tubes
were centrifuged at Gmax for 15 minutes. The supernatant was then poured off and
the pellet washed by adding 500 wL of 70% room temperature ethanol without
mixing, and the tubes centrifuged again at Gmax for five minutes. Finally, the
ethanol was poured off, and the pellet dried in a DNA 120, DNA-speedvac
(Savant) using a medium heat setting. The pellet was re-suspended in 1x TE
buffer (pH 8.0), quantitated on the EagleEye II, as for DNA extractions, and diluted in 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0) to make a concentration of 200 ng uL" Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector
Ligations were performed to join the digested genomic DNA to the vector,
forming a circular piece of DNA that is able to be taken up by a bacterium, thus
enabling fast and efficient screening of the genomic DNA for microsatellite
sequences.
Ligation of the digested, size-selected genomic DNA into the prepared vector was performed using T4 DNA Ligase (Boehringer Mannheim). Ratios of 1:1 and 3:1
(insert: vector) were trialed in an effort to optimise the ligation efficiency. The reaction consisted of: 1x ligation buffer (5.0 mM MgCh, 1.0 mM dithiothreitol, final concentrations), 2.0 U of T4 DNA ligase, 400 ng digested vector and 225 ng
insert DNA in a total reaction volume of 20 wL. Transformations were incubated at 16°C for 16 hours on an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient thermocycler with the lid set to 16°C. Two volumes of 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0) were added to each reaction and then the reactions were heated to 65°C for 15 minutes. Ligation
reactions were stored at -20°C.
Table 2.2 Control ligation reactions.
Reagent volume (iLL) Control One Two Three
10x Ligation buffer | l | T4 DNA Ligase (1.0 U UL") 0 1 I Vector (200 ng pL") 1 0 Insert DNA (20 ng pL") 0 0 0 Uncut Plasmid (10 ng wL”) 0 0 | Milli-Q Water 8 7 7
Total reaction volume (UL) 10 10 10
Three controls were also set up at the same time and under the same reaction
conditions in a 10 wL volume. These are shown in Table 2.2. Control 1 is a
negative control that tests the amount of uncut vector in the preparation. Control 2 tests the ability of the vector to ligate to itself (re-circularise). Control 3 tests the ability of the vector without insert to be taken up by the competent cells. A
fourth control, called the background control, was also used; this consisted of transforming 100 WL of competent cells (see below) with 50 ng of uncut plasmid
to test the level of vector uptake under non-ligated conditions es Materials and Methods Competent Cell Preparation
Competent cells are the medium by which it is possible to obtain large amounts of
DNA containing an insert in a short amount of time. To enable this the bacterial
cells must be prepared to make them receptive (“competent”) to the uptake of
DNA from outside the cell.
Initially, a modified Chung et al. (1989) method was used for preparation and transformation of competent cells. It was recommended that fresh competent cells
be prepared before each set of transformations (R. Cursons, pers. comm.), for this reason the Chung et al. (1989) method was selected, based on the speed, simplicity of preparation and the high levels of transformants (~1 x10° per microgram of insert DNA) produced. The second method trialed followed Nishimura et al. (1990). This method was used as it gave extremely high transformation efficiency (~1 x10° per wg insert DNA, Nishimura et al., 1990),
was relatively simple in preparation and allowed storage of the cells in the transformation medium for several months with little loss of competency, which 1s in contrast to the Chung et al., (1989) method which was reported to be able to be
stored, however it was found that this decreases the competency of the cells.
Competent cell preparation and transformations were performed by following either the protocol based on the protocol of Chung et al. (1989) modified by G.
Jacobsen (pers. comm.) to make fresh competent cells each experiment, or by the method of Nishimura et al. (1990) for storage of pre-pared competent cells. All
work was performed under sterile conditions either in a laminar flow cabinet or
under PC2 conditions in a biological safety cabinet.
Method 1, Chung et al. (1989): LB-agar plates containing 50 Lg mL’! tetracycline
(Sigma) were streaked with stock cultures of Escherichia coli, strain XL1 - Blue
(recAl endAl gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 supE44 relAl lac{[F proAB laclZAM15 Tn10
(Tet')]) (Stratagene). Plates were incubated inverted at 37 °C overnight. From the
streak plates, individual colonies were picked using a sterile toothpick and placed
in 3 mL of LB-broth containing 10 mM MgSQag, 0.2% glucose (supplemented LB broth), and 50 ug mL" tetracycline to make over-night cultures, which were
incubated at 37°C in a shaking incubator at approximately 250 revolutions pe minute (rpm). A 1.0% inoculum of over-night culture was added to supplemented
LB-broth (i.e., for a 50 mL culture, 0.5 mL of overnight culture was added to 50 mL of supplemented LB-broth) and incubated at 37°C and 225 rpm in a shaking incubator. The number of cultures was determined by the number of
ligations, including controls, and one or two extra (to account for error). When
the ODeo0 of the cell suspension was between 0.4-0.5 as measured on a Shimadzu
UV-160 spectrophotometer, 1 mL aliquots of the cells were transferred into sterile
1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 15 s at Gmax on a bench-top centrifuge (Eppendorf 5415D). The pelleted cells were re-suspended in 100 wL of ice-cold Ix TSS by gently flicking the tube and iced for 5 — 10 minutes.
Method 2, Nishimura et al. (1990) The second method to prepare competent cells followed the methods of Nishimura et al. (1990) exactly. Cells were grown in pre-warmed supplemented LB-broth (see above), to which a 1.0% inoculum of
over night culture (as above) had been added. Cultures were incubated in an
orbital shaker at 37°C until the optical density (ODg¢00) of the cells suspension was
between 0.4 and 0.6. When this point was reached (approximately 4 — 6 hours), the cell suspension was iced for 10 minutes. The suspension was then aliquoted into chilled centrifuge tubes (for a 50 mL solution, 12.5 mL per tube for 4 tubes) and centrifuged at 1500 G on an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge for 10 minutes at
4°C and the supernatant poured off. The cells were then re-suspended by gently
flicking the tube, in a total volume of 500 uL of ice-cold supplemented LB-broth
(see above) while on ice. Once the cells were re-suspended 2.5 mL of ice cold LB broth containing 36% glycerol, 12% PEG 8000, and 12 mM MgSO, was added
and mixed gently. The resulting cell suspension was then aliquoted (100 WL) into
chilled 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and stored at —76°C until use.
For use, cells from the above method, were taken out of the freezer and thawed on ice. Immediately the cells were thawed, 5.0 WL of ligated DNA or control was
added and the cells transformed as in the transformation section, below.
Heat Shock Transformations
Transformations are the procedure by which the cells take up the vector, cells
without a vector will not grow on the antibiotics in the plates, and those with vector can be selected by blue/white phenotype expressed by those with or
without an insert respectively.
Transformations were conducted under New Zealand Environmental Risk
Management Authority (ERMA) permit number GMO99/UOW005, obtained for
genetic modification of E. coli in the laboratory. Transformations were conducted
in an approved PC2 facility.
Five microlitres of ligated vector and insert, or control, were transformed into 100 wL of competent cells (XL-1-Blue, Stratagene) prepared as above, using heat shock following Nishimura et al. (1990). Two to five microlitres of ligation product or control was added to 100 WL of thawed or fresh competent cells on ice, in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube using a chilled pipette tip, the tubes were then
incubated at 4°C for 20 — 30 minutes. Tubes were incubated on ice for 1 minute, heat shocked at 42°C in a water bath for 1.5 minutes and immediately placed back on ice for 2 minutes. The cells were allowed to recover by adding 895 uL, 37°C, LB-broth (un-supplemented) and incubating for 1 hour at 37°C in the shaking incubator. Finally, the cells were centrifuged to form a pellet, and the pellet resuspended in 100 wL of room temperature, LB-broth (un-supplemented), by gently flicking the tube. Once cells had been re-suspended, 25 — 50 wL of the resulting cell suspension was spread onto 90 mm diameter LB-agar plates containing 50 ug mL” tetracycline and ampicillin (Sigma) and spread with X-gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl B-D-galactopyranoside, Sigma) and IPTG (isopropyl B-D-thiogalactopyranoside, Sigma) to make final concentrations of 50 mM and
25 mM respectively (25 wL and 5 wL per 90 mm diameter plate, respectively). The X-gal and IPTG allow the cells to exhibit blue/white phenotypes according to
the presence or absence of an insert into the pBluescript KS® + phagemid vector.
Plates were inverted and grown overnight (or until colonies were pinhead-sized)
at 37°C and then incubated at 4°C to enhance expression of the blue/white colour
(Sambrook et al., 1989).
Insert Size Checks
To check that white colonies contained inserted sequences, white colonies from
libraries of transformed cells were selected for PCR-based insert checks pBluescript KS® + phagemid vector has a multiple cloning site (MCS) of 223 bp when amplified using M13 primers. Thus, if the amplified plasmid has no insert, the size of the PCR product will be 233 bp; any product with a larger size will have an insert. The size of the inserts was determined by subtracting 220 from
any product larger than 220 bp in length, an average of the results gave the
average size of the inserts.
Twenty PCR tubes (0.2 mL) were labelled for each library being tested. Twentyfive microlitres of Milli-Q water was then added to each tube. A sterile toothpick was touched to a white colony and then twirled in the water for two seconds; this
was repeated using a fresh toothpick for each colony selected until all twenty
tubes had been inoculated.
ts ope em ii a coe oi es alt es es me Ce ee CS ed |
wd 3 am » > » - i s aa Cora Cd ae 4 oe . vette, - ~ — or Le
 
Figure 2.6 Photo of an agarose gel of DNA bands from the M13 multiple cloning site of pBluescript KS® +. Lanes 2 — 17 contain the PCR products of the
amplification reaction above. Lanes | and 18 contain 0.3 pg 100 bp ladder. The top bright band of the ladder is at 2072 bp, the bright band halfway down the ladder is 600 bp in size, other bands are at 100 bp intervals. Positive and negative controls were run on another gel with other picked clones. Arrowed band contained no insert
Twenty-two new PCR tubes were labelled (twenty as for the first set, above, and a
positive and negative) and a PCR master mix set up according to the following protocol: 1.5 mM MgCl), 0.5 uM M13 Universal forward primer, 0.5 uM M13 Universal reverse primer (Life Technologies), 0.15 mM each dNTP (Roche), 0.5
U Taq DNA polymerase (Roche), in a total reaction volume of 25 wL. Fiv microlitres of the water/bacteria mix above was added per reaction. The reactions were amplified on an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient thermocycler using the
following parameters: 25 cycles of 94°C for 1 minute, 50°C for 30 s, 72°C for 90
S followed by 72°C for 7 minutes and then held at 4°C until run on a gel. Ten microlitres of PCR product was electrophoresed on a 1.5% agarose gel in 1x TBE
buffer with 0.3 ug of 100 bp ladder as reference and visualised on an EagleEye DNA visualisation system (Stratagene) using ultra-violet light (Figure 2.6).
Lifting of White Colonies onto Filters
Lifts are performed to enable the hybridisation step to take place. Hybridisation is not possible in situ for bacterial colonies, thus it is necessary to remove the colonies onto a solid substrate that will allow extraction of the DNA from the cells
and then bind to the DNA, and allow it to be screened by hybridisation.
Total colony counts were taken, as well as numbers of blue and white colonies for calculation of transformation efficiency. White colonies were picked and replated (streaks about 0.5 cm long in a spiral design) onto replica 150 mm diameter
LB-agar plates containing 50 ug mL’! ampicillin at a density of about 200 streaks
per 150 mm diameter plate.
These colonies were then lifted onto positively charged nylon filters (N’,
Boehringer Mannheim) by 15 minutes incubation at 4°C, the filter must be layed carefully on the plate so that all of the filter becomes wet, while excluding air bubbles. Filters were labelled with direction-orienting arrows, and an identification number to match the plate to the filter. The filters were then punctured with a needle in three places and these places marked on the plate, as further identification. The bacteria are then lysed by placing the filter colony side up on a mild detergent (10% SDS); at this stage, the surface of the filter becomes yellow with the digested cells. After this, the DNA is denatured to allow binding of the DNA to the positively charged membrane, performed on a saline base solution. The filter is then placed on a neutralising solution that allows the DNA to bind to the filter and finally washed to remove excess bacterial proteins. After
this, the filter is dried and the DNA more firmly bound to the filter by crosslinking with short-wave ultra-violet light (UV) in a BLX-254 UV crosslinke breaks some of the DNA: DNA bonds that have formed during the extraction process, creating sites with a negative charge that can bind to the positively charged filter by covalent bonds (Brown et al., 1991). The crosslinked filters
were stored wrapped in aluminium foil under a dry vacuum (Sambrook et al. 1989). A schematic of this process is shown in Figure 2.7. Six filters were lifted
with a total of 1301 white colonies divided between them.
Filter
    
15 min
10%SDS Denaturing sol" Neutralising sol" 2x SSC
5 min 5 min 5 min
  
5 min
 
45 nin Room temperature
Ys
UV, 120 mJ cm!
 
Figure 2.7 Schematic of the lifting procedure, the first step it to lay the filter on a
plate, then incubate for 15 minutes at 4°C, followed by 5 minutes, colony side up on filter paper wet with 10% SDS, then 5 minutes on each of the other three solutions, finally the filter is dried and crosslinked.
Probing of Filters
Probing is the step at which the genomic DNA 1s screened for microsatellite
sequences, this is carried out through the use of radio-labelled probe complementary to the sequence being screened for (in this case microsatellite
probes can be exposed to a film and areas that have probe bound to them can be
seen as dark patches on the film.
The filters were probed with *3P_labelled microsatellite sequences (GT)\s, (GA)15, (CAA)io, (AT)is, (ATT)10, (TCC)io (Life Technologies). All work with
radioisotopes was performed in a registered isotope facility, following standard
procedures for health and safety.
DNA oligonucleotide probes were labelled using Polynucleotide Kinase (PNK,
Roche) in a 50 uL reaction with the following conditions: 1x PNK direct buffer, SO wWCi y 3P-ATP (Amersham), 20 U PNK, 50 pM oligonucleotide (or combination of nucleotides, see Table 2.2). Tailing reactions were incubated at 37°C for 2 — 4
hours and the probes stored at -20°C until use.
The radio-labelled probes were then hybridised to the nylon filters (see below) and the filters washed at appropriate temperatures (see Table 2.3) following a modified Sambrook et al. (1989). Melting temperatures for the oligonucleotides
were calculated on the basis of the following equation:
Tm = 81.5 + 41(%GC) - (675/primer length) (Equation 1)
where the %GC is the decimal value (e.g. 60% GC = 0.6), and the primer length is in base pairs. This value had approximately 20 - 25°C subtracted and rounded to a convenient number. The (GT)1s5, (GA)is, (CAA)i9 probes were hybridised at 55°C on the advice of R. J. Wilkins (pers. comm.).
A shaking incubator (Hybaid Midi Duel 14) was turned on and set to the
appropriate temperature, then approximately 125 mL of pre-hybridisation solution
(6x SSC, 0.1% SDS, 1x Denhardt’s solution) was poured into a plastic container,
and another 125 mL of the same solution measured, placed in a glass bottle and
both the solutions were placed in the incubator. After the incubator and solution SSS METALS aN MlethOGS © had reached the set temperature, the filters were placed (one by one) into
approximately 200 mL of room temperature 2x SSC in another container to pre wet the filters. The container was agitated gently by hand as the filters were being
added so that the solution covered each filter before the next was added.
Table 2.3 Probe hybridisation and washing temperatures.
 
Probe Hybridisation Temp. (°C) Washing Temp. (°C) (GT)is, (GA)is, (CAA)10 55 48 (AT)15, (ATT) io 40 30 (TCC)0 68 55
After the filters were wet (approximately 10 minutes) the warmed container with
pre-hybridisation solution was taken out of the incubator and the filters transferred
to it one by one as for the 2x SSC. The container with 2x SSC was emptied and rinsed in dH2,O. Ten millilitres per filter of pre-hybridisation solution (6x SSC,
0.1% SDS, 1x Denhardt’s solution) was measured into the appropriate number of hybridisation tubes (one per filter, as close as possible to filter size, so as to allow the filter to fit in the tube with minimal overlapping of the edges of the filter) and these were placed in the incubator and allowed to warm to the hybridisation temperature. The bacterial side of the filters was rubbed with a Kim-wipe while under the warm pre-hybridisation solution in the plastic container. The filters were then rolled into a cylinder without touching the colony side of the filter, and transferred into the warm hybridisation tubes (one filter per tube, colony side innermost) and the solution swirled to wet the filter. They were then placed in the incubator and pre-hybridised for 15 — 20 minutes with rotation to ensure the surfaces of the filter were coated in a film of solution. During the prehybridisation the probe was removed from the freezer and placed behind a perspex shield. After the pre-hybridisation was completed, the pre-hybridisation solution was poured out of the tubes and 10 mL of fresh, pre-warmed hybridisation solution was added. The defrosted probe was then divided equally among the tubes and placed directly into the buffer in the tubes, the lids were put
back onto the tubes and the filters incubated at the hybridisation temperature for
1 — 2 hours.
After the hybridisation time had elapsed, the hybridisation tubes were taken out o the incubator and the incubator reset to washing temperature, leaving the door open. Probe solution was poured into labelled 50 mL tubes, and stored at 4°C [ssDNA (single stranded-DNA) probes can be used for 1 — 2 weeks with minimal loss of signal]. The filters were removed from the tubes and immediately placed in approximately 120 mL of 2x SSC, 0.5% SDS at room temperature, after
5 minutes the filters were removed from this solution and placed in approximately 120 mL of 2x SSC, 0.1% SDS also at room temperature. These were incubated for 15 minutes with occasional agitation. When the 15 minute incubation had
elapsed, the filters were placed in 120 ml of 0.1x SSC, 0.5% SDS at wash
temperature and incubated with agitation for 15 minutes. Used wash-solutions was poured directly into a sink drain without splashing, with water run during and
after for 15-20 minutes to dilute the residual isotope a much as possible.
The filters were removed from the final wash-solution and placed colony side up
on filter paper to dry (45 minutes at 45°C in an incubator). A Geiger counter was
passed over the filters to check that there was some radioactivity present on the filters (an indication that the hybridisation had worked). Probed filters were then exposed to X-ray film (Kodak, X-Omat AR) (see Exposing and Developing Films
section below).
Filters were stripped between hybridisations with different combinations of probes (see Table 2.3) by pre-wetted in room temperature 2x SSC, removing these to a fresh container and pouring boiling 0.5% SDS over the filters, allowing them to cool to room temperature and then drying the filters again (Amersham International plc, Hybond™-N” product information sheet). A Geiger counter was
passed over the dry filters to check for residual radiation.
After the filters had been hybridised for the first time, there was no need for the Kim-wipe step in subsequent hybridisations, so this step was omitted and the filters were simply pre-wetted as above, and then placed directly into the warm pre-hybridisation buffer. Hybridisation procedures were followed from this point. In the optimisation stages for this procedure several different methods were used for hybridisation, these were: Variations in the hybridisation time from one hour
to overnight (16 hours); variations in washing solutions, the Glenn (2001 protocol recommends washing twice in 6x SSC, 0.1% SDS at the washing temperature, however this was found not to be effective in eliminating non specific hybridisation, so the recommendations of Sambrook et al. (1989), were
followed to create the above procedure.
Exposing and Developing Film Exposure to the hybridised filters to a film allows the colonies that had a
microsatellite-containing insert to be selected. This is done by examining the
developed film for dark patches, which indicate the presence of a microsatellite containing sequence in the colony.
Once dry, the top left corner of the filter paper was marked, the filters taped in place on the filter paper and this assemblage placed in a film cassette and taken to the dark room. In the dark room, under the safe light, a piece of X-ray film was taken out of the packet and the top left corner folded over. This was then placed in the cassette so that the top left corner of the film aligned with the marked left comer of the filter paper. The cassette was closed and the sides taped. Films
were exposed for 6 — 24 hours at room temperature.
Once exposure was complete, films were developed manually by the following method: Developer and fixer trays were set up with the respective solutions, using a minimal amount of developer (Kodak) in the developer tray and 1 — 2 centimetres depth of fixer (Kodak) in the fixer tray. The safe light was turned on and the normal lights turned off. The film cassette was opened and the film lifted off the filters, and lowered into the developer with gentle agitation so that the solution covered the film on all sides. The cassette was closed and agitation of the developer was continued for 1 — 2 minutes. Images started to appear towards the end of this time. Once the images started to form, the film was lifted out of the developer and allowed to drip-dry for a few seconds. Then the film was placed in the fixer so that the film was totally covered. The normal lights were turned on and the film fixed with agitation for twice the time it was in the developing
solution (2 — 4 minutes). The film was then rinsed under cold flowing water for 5
minutes and allowed to dry completely before touching (2 — 3 hours) Screening Putative Positive Clones
Putative positive clones are those colonies that had a positive first hybridisation. In this step these colonies are picked off the plates and the insert amplified and rescreened for microsatellites. This step is similar to the Insert Size Checks step
above in the methods used, but this step is carried out to eliminate sequencing of
false positives from the probing step above. The amplification can be done
straight from bacteria ruptured in distilled water, or from plasmid extracts (see
dsDNA extraction).
Once developed and dried, the 12 o’clock arrows, plate identification numbers and the needle hole positions were marked on the film and the films aligned with
the appropriate plate. Colonies on the blots that showed up as dark images,
potentially containing microsatellite sequences, were picked from the re-plated
colonies using sterile pipette tips. For each colony picked, the tip used for picking
was pipetted up and down in a PCR tube containing 25 wL Milli-Q water, and then the tip ejected into a culture tube containing 1.5 mL of LB-broth with 50 wg
mL” ampicillin, these were then grown overnight at 37°C in a shaking incubator
(225 rpm), for manufacture of glycerol stocks and plasmid extraction the next day.
The PCR tubes containing water with bacterial isolates were PCR amplified using M13 primers (see Insert Size Checks section above) and visualised on a
1.5% agarose gel in TBE buffer. Five microlitres of M13-PCR products of the appropriate size (>220 bp) were mixed with 5 uwL of sequencing stop dye and heated to 90°C for | minute. Small square nylon filters (N*, Boehringer
Mannheim), were marked in an approximately 1.5 cm’ grid pattern, and 5 uL of
the M13-MCS PCR product spotted (dot-blot) onto the grid pattern, which were allowed to dry and then cross-linked by the same methods used for other filters.
Dot-blots were probed and visualised using the same methods as in the probing
section above, without the Kim-wipe step.
Double-Stranded DNA Extraction
Plasmids are the insert-containing circular DNA that was screened in the previous few steps. In this step the plasmids are isolated and the DNA used for
amplification of the insert, or for sequencing of the insert Glycerol stocks of the picked cultures were made using 100 wL of the overnight culture of bacterial cells grown in the Step above in LB-broth with ampicillin,
tetracycline (both at 50 ug mL’) and 30% glycerol, and then the glycerol stocks
were stored at —76°C.
Plasmid DNA was extracted from the 1.4 mL of overnight culture remaining from
the screening of putative positive clones, above. This was performed using a
modified X-Gen protocol (modified alkaline lysis) leaving out the guanidine hydrochloride resin step and simply precipitating the DNA with ethanol (Appendix 3). Pellets were re-suspended in 80 wL 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0)
FURTHER MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT STEPS
For complete development of microsatellites further steps in the protocol need to be performed. As the development was not completed, these are outlined below,
followed by a second microsatellite development protocol that was attempted.
Single-Stranded DNA Extraction Isolation of the single-stranded plasmid DNA (ssDNA) is performed using helper
phage. Two millilitres of 2x YT-broth containing tetracycline (50 ug mL”) and ampicillin (50 ug mL”) are inoculated with Helper Phage (10 pfu) and then with 100 uL of cells from the screening putative positive clones step, above. The infected cultures are then grown at 37°C in a shaking incubator for one hour, after
which 1.0 mL of 2x YT-broth with 50 pg mL" ampicillin, tetracycline and
kanamycin (Sigma) is added and the incubation continued.
After the infected cells have grown to saturation (approximately 24 hours), 1.5 mL aliquots are placed in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes (two per culture tube) and centrifuged at Gmax on a benchtop centrifuge for 10 minutes. One and a half millilitres of the supernatant is then transferred to a new tube containing 200 wL PEG, mixed by inversion and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. DNA is removed from suspension by centrifuging the tubes at Gjax on a bench-top centrifuge for 15 minutes, the supernatant aspirated off and the tubes centrifuged
again at Gmax for 2 minutes, the supernatant is again aspirated off. The ssDN pellets are re-suspended in 50 uwL of 1x TE buffer (pH 8.0) and the pellets
combined. The tubes are then placed in boiling water for 2 minutes before storage
at -20°C.
Insert Sequencing and Primer Design
Sequencing of inserts is to be performed on an ABI prism 377 automated DNA sequencer (Perkin Elmer Applied Biosystems), using the facilities available at the
University of Waikato DNA Sequencing Unit. Reactions are performed using the
dideoxy chain termination method (Sanger et al., 1977) and BigDye Terminator
Chemistry®.
Primers are designed using a program such as Oligo (Piotr Rychlik and Wojciech Rychlik
Optimisation of PCR conditions is performed on an Eppendorf Mastercycler Gradient thermocycler, using the gradient function to determine the optimal annealing temperature. Initial Ty was either calculated on the basis of the G/C content of the primers developed (Equation 2), or taken from the annealing
temperature calculated by the manufacturer of the primers (Life Technologies).
Annealing temperature optimisation is performed at 10°C on either side of this
temperature (i.e. Ty + 10°C). The optimal annealing temperature is taken to be
the temperature that produced the least bands on a gel, or produced a band that
had significantly stronger signal strength than any other in the same lane on the
gel.
For primers greater than 1Obp in length in 50 mM salt solution (PCR conditions):
Tm = 59.9 + 41(%GC) — (675/ primer length) (Equation 2)
Where percent G/C values are the decimal value (e.g. 46% G/C = 0.46) and the
primer length is in base pairs.
Screening for Variation
Screening for polymorphisms is performed on DNA extracted from the population
level Antarctic moss samples. Sequences that are found to be polymorphic ar developed for full-scale length-polymorphism analysis of the populations.
Screening is performed by labelling one primer with “P in a SOuL reaction:
[x PNK direct buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL, 10 mM MgCh, 5 MM dithiothreitol,
0.1 mM_ sepermidine, final concentrations), 16 U Polynucleotide Kinase
(Boehringer Mannheim), 12.0 uL y*P-ATP, added to 310 pMol of primer. The
reactions are then incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes in an incubator.
Fifty nanograms of DNA from each individual is placed in an appropriately labelled PCR tube and 10.5 uL of a master mix containing 1.6 mM MgCh, 0.52 YM un-labelled primer, 0.83 11M ~’P-labelled primer, 0.16 mM dNTPs (Roche) and 0.5 U Tag DNA polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim or Roche). The
reactions are then amplified according to the appropriate parameters on an
Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient thermocycler: 94°C for 2 minutes, followed by 10 cycles of 94°C for | minute, optimal annealing temperature for 30 s, 72°C for 30 s. Once the amplification is finished, 13 wL of sequencing stop solution is
added per reaction, and reactions are heated to 90°C for 1 minute and then iced
until loaded on a pre-warmed 6.0% polyacrylamide gel (Appendix 3). The gel is run for different lengths of time according to the expected size of the product
(Table 2.3). When the gel run is complete, it is dried and exposed to X-ray film
(see Exposing and Developing Films above).
Table 2.4 Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis times for different PCR product
SIZES. Expected product size Run time (hours) 100 bp 1.5 200 bp 2.0 300 bp 3.0
Microsatellites that exhibit variation will show as different length bands on the
gels, these can be assumed to be variants in the microsatellite length. Those
sequences that exhibit such a pattern can be used for population analysis.
Scoring Microsatellite Loci
Once polymorphic loci had been determined, the primers designed for each are
used to amplify DNA from individuals within each population. This is performe on polyacrylamide sequencing style gels (Appendix 3), like the ones used in
screening for variation. The resulting data is scored by eye or by GeneScan software (Version 2.5) and analysed using Arlequin software, Version 2.0 (Schnieder et al., 2000), Phylip Version 3.5 (Felsenstein, 1993) or PAUP* (phylogenetic analysis using parsimony *and other methods) (Swofford, 1998).
MP-PCR DEVELOPMENT
Based on the protocols of Weising et al. (1995), microsatellites were developed using RAPD-PCR protocols to amplify DNA from the moss samples and extract
those sequences that contained microsatellite sequences.
This was performed using a RAPD reaction, primed with a microsatellite primer as a second primer in a reaction known as MP-PCR or microsatellite-primed PCR (Ramser et al., 1997a). At the same time a RAPD reaction was set up with a
RAPD primer. MP-PCR and RAPD reactions were performed following Balakrishna (1995) with the following conditions: 1x PCR buffer (1.5 mM
MgCl, 50 mM KCl), 0.1 mM each dNTP, 0.5 uM Primer [Operon Technologies (RAPD) or Gibco BRL (MP-PCR)], 1.5 U Tag DNA polymerase (Roche) in a
25 pL reaction volume. Cycling conditions on an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient thermocycler were as follows: 94°C for 2 minutes, followed by 41 cycles of 94°C for 1 minute, 37°C for 1 minute and 72°C for 2 minutes, with a final extension of 72°C for 4 minutes. Samples were held at 4°C before loading onto a
gel. Small amounts (2.0 WL) of these reactions were electrophoresed on small
1.5% TBE-agarose gels containing 0.1 ng mL" ethidium bromide (Appendix 3) for three hours so that the banding patterns could be fully seen. Each lane that had a MP-PCR electrophoresed in it had a normal RAPD reaction run beside it so
that the difference in banding pattern could be determined. Gels were visualised
using an EagleEye DNA visualisation system (Stratagene).
MP-PCR development was unable to proceed past the visualisation on gels due to
time constraints, however, further steps are given below:
When it has been determined which MP-PCR amplified samples contained bands that are different to those found in the standard RAPD reaction, the MP-PCR
samples are again electrophoresed on a large polyacrylamide gel (Appendix 3) the banding pattern is Southern blotted onto a nylon membrane (N*, Boehringer
Mannheim) and the gel dried to preserve the banding pattern for a later step. The
filter is probed with a repeat oligonucleotide labelled with y°P-ATP (see Probing section above). The resulting bands seen on an autoradiograph are those that contain a microsatellite sequence. The autoradiograph is then aligned with the original gel and those bands that had show a positive result are excised and the DNA extracted using a Concert™ Gel Extraction System (Life Technologies). Form here, the extracted DNA is cloned into a vector that will ligate PCR products such as pGEM-T easy vector systems (Promega), or via TA cloning. The ligated MP-PCR-product and vector are then transformed into a bacterial host, such as XL1-Blue (Stratagene) and the resulting clones are grown up as in the main microsatellite development protocol above. After this the plasmids are extracted, M13 MCS amplified and dot-blotted to confirm the presence of a microsatellite containing insert. The extracted DNA is to be sequenced using BigDye Terminator Chemistry® (ABI Prism, Perkin Elmer Applied Biosystems) at the University of Waikato DNA Sequencing Facility.
Microsatellite containing sequences obtained from this are used to design primers
for the amplification of the microsatellite regions. These primers are then used to
screen populations for variation as in the main microsatellite protocol CHAPTER 3
RESULTS
 
GENOMIC DNA EXTRACTION
DNA extractions generally resulted in large quantities of high molecular weight
DNA being produced from the samples extracted (Figure 3.1). The DNA concentrations of extracted stock solutions ranged from 4 to 90 ng wL” as determined by a modified Saran™ wrap method (Sambrook et al., 1989), using an
EagleEye DNA still visualisation system (Stratagene) to estimate the concentrations, based on the strength of fluorescence of samples relative to
standards.
 
Figure 3.1 Extracted DNA from New Zealand Bryum argenteum, lane numbers 17 are samples HR1/1 BA, HR 1/2 BA, blank, HR 2/1 BA, HR 2/2 BA,
HR 3/1 BA, HR 3/2 BA respectively. Lane marked (L) contains 0.3 ug 100 bp ladder (Life Technologies). Lane 3 was left as a blank as the well was damaged.
Concentrations of the samples in ng uL” are, left to right: 10, 36, 18, 34, 4, and 28 as determined by a Hoefer DNA fluorometer (Hoefer Scientific Instruments).
It was found that the GeneQuant II (Pharmacia Biotech) gave inaccurate readings
of DNA concentrations, commonly producing zero readings for the DN concentration, such as for the samples above. However, this instrument was
useful for determining the purity of the DNA. This is performed by calculating the ratio of absorbance readings at 260 and 280 nm. Pure DNA has a reading of 1.8 (Sambrook et al., 1989). 260:280 nm ratios for the above samples ranged
from 1.917 to 1.300 with an average of 1.714, indicating that the DNA was
reasonably pure.
FUNGAL DETECTION
Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS)
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the ITS (internal transcribed spacer) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA involves the use of specific primers to
amplify between the 18S and the 26S genes, encompassing ITS1 and ITS2 as well ITSSHP >
as the 5.8S gene (Baldwin, 1992) (Figure 3.2). 18S nuclear rDNA 26S nuclear rDNA <— ITS4
Figure 3.2 A schematic of the ITS regions of nrDNA showing the positions of the 18S, 5.8S and 26S ribosomal genes with ITS1 and ITS2 between them (not to scale). Primer binding sites are shown as arrows marked as “ITS4” and “TTSSHP”.
  
Amplification of the ITS regions for the purposes of this project, was to detect fungal contamination of the DNA extracted from Antarctic mosses. Hunger (2000) established that contamination of mosses by fungi could result in DNA extracted from the moss being contaminated by fungal DNA extracted simultaneously. Amplification of the ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA from Antarctic moss samples indicated the presence of a contaminant in the moss. Uncontaminated samples produced a single band of approximately 1100 bp in length (Figure 3.3). Contaminated samples produced a band approximately 550 bp in length (Figure 3.4). This test was performed on all samples used for
microsatellite development to determine if there was likely to be a fungal
contaminant in the extracted DNA from these samples (Figure 3.3).
The distinctive second PCR-amplified band of the ITS region in some Antarctic
samples allowed subsequent easy identification of contaminants in moss DN eS eee sé
extracts. However, not all contaminated samples were able to be identified in this
manner, thus the RAPD-PCR analysis was also performed.
 
Figure 3.3 ITS bands from un-contaminated samples. Lane 1 contains 0.3 ug
100 bp ladder (Life Technologies), the three brightest bands on the ladder are; top to bottom, 2072, 1500 and 600 bp, other bands are at 100 bp intervals. Lanes 2 - 7
are bands from the New Zealand moss samples (HR series) used in microsatellite
development. Lanes 8 and 9 contain negative and positive controls (Pittosporum cornifolium) respectively.
ue CC
 
Figure 3.4 ITS products showing the multiple bands characteristic of contamination of the DNA. Lane marked “L” contains 0.3 ug 100 bp ladder (New England Biolabs), band sizes in base pairs are marked next to the ladder. Lane | contains an un-contaminated Antarctic moss sample (SH 16 BA), lanes 2 and 3 contain contaminated Antarctic moss samples (SH 27-2 BS, SH 23-1 BP), note bands marked by arrows, lane 4 contains a New Zealand moss sample (HR 1/2 BA) with no fungal contaminant, and lane 5 contains amplified fungal DNA. Lanes 6 and 7 contain positive (Pittosporum cornifolium) and negative controls respectively Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) RAPD-PCR was used to determine the presence of fungal DNA in the DNA
extracted from the moss samples that had been extracted. It was determined that
this system was possible by Hunger (2000) after the discovery that some Antarctic
moss samples had fungal contaminants in them. The work of Skotnicki et al.
(1998a, b, c) using RAPD analysis to determine the relatedness of populations of
Antarctic mosses had found that there was hyper-variability among the
populations studied (mostly in Victoria Land), and it was thus brought into debate
as to whether it was possible that the extreme variability seen was due to fungal contamination of the samples that were used in this analysis. Figure 3.5 presents a typical RAPD banding pattern produced by a sample of Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium free of fungi (SH 16 BA), a sample of Antarctic B. argenteum known to have fungal contaminants, (SH 21 BA), an Antarctic B. subrotundifolium known to have fungal contaminants (SH 34 BS), one New Zealand specimen of Bryum argenteum (HR 2/1 BA), a fungus (Phoma sp.) and lastly a reaction in which fungal DNA and moss DNA (SH 16 BA) were combined (“spiked”’).
A comparison of the of the banding patterns from the amplified DNA samples indicated that fungal contaminants were present in many Antarctic moss samples, and that this could often be verified on whole voucher specimens under magnification through a stereo-microscope (20x), although fungal hyphae were not observed on all samples that the RAPD analysis indicated had fungal contaminants. It can be seen in Figure 3.5 that there are common banding patterns among the moss samples and with the combined fungal and moss DNA samples. As can be seen there is a significant difference between the moss samples and the fungal sample, although there are some similarities between the contaminated samples and the fungal sample, some of the bands obtained from the “spiked” sample match the moss bands, these are much brighter than the fungal bands, however these are still present, but the pattern obtained is not the same as from those samples that were contaminated at extraction. This pattern for the “spiked” sample may be due to the different levels of fungal DNA in each, with this sample
having a much higher level of fungal component than the contaminated samples Eset
RAPD amplification of fungal DNA alone produced a banding pattern distinct from that produced using non-contaminated Bryum DNA, however the banding pattern produced by samples that were contaminated was a combination of both of the banding patterns above, with some bands missing from either of the first two patterns. It is not known why there should be some bands absent from patterns produced by the contaminated samples, when compared to those produced by the
uncontaminated moss and fungal extractions, but it is thought that there could be preferential binding of primers to one DNA over the other for some binding sites in the PCR (Black IV, 1993). It should be noted that potentially, not all fungi present on the moss samples have been identified, and other species may be present that would produce different banding patterns in a RAPD reaction, thus
this method is not an absolute for detection of potential contaminants in the moss
DNA.
1500 —
wiee”.hhCmttCt~™ eee)...
 
Figure 3.5 Banding patterns produced by RAPD-PCR of three moss samples (Lanes | — 3, SH 16 BA, SH 21 BA, SH 34 BP), a fungal sample isolated from an Antarctic moss (lane 4), and a combined moss (SH 16 BA) and fungal DNA
sample (Lane 5). Lanes 6 and 7 contain positive (Pittosporum cornifolium) and
negative controls respectively. Lane marked L contains 0.3 tug 100 bp ladder (Life Technologies). Note the band (line) in the negative control, this should be ignored in any other lane in which it is found. Shared bands are marked by
arrows in the spiked sample lane, M indicates moss, F indicates fungal.
The faint band seen in lane 1| of the above figure is probably the result of degraded
DNA. Incorrect annealing temperature is seen in other lanes (2, 3, 5) where eee sR CSS higher level of background amplification was observed, making it harder to distinguish the banding pattern (not shown). Note the inconsistency in the
banding pattern in lanes 1 and 5, both of which contain the same moss DNA
sample.
MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT Microsatellite development followed a modified Glenn (2001) protocol as
extracted from the website (http://www.uga.edu/srel/DNA_ Lab), January 2001.
The modifications made to this protocol were to suit the facilities available at the University of Waikato and as suited the results obtained at each step. Changes to the protocol were also made in areas where there were incomplete or incorrect
instructions for a particular step. The results for each step will be discussed under
the same titles used in the materials and methods chapter.
Genomic DNA Preparation and Size Selection Genomic DNA was digested using DpnlII restriction enzyme, this enzyme produces ends on the DNA, after restriction that are complementary to those
produce by Bam HI, the enzyme used in vector preparation. The restriction
sequence for Dpn II 1s:
5°-L GATC -3’
3°- CTAGT-5’ An example of digested genomic DNA is seen in Figure 3.6. For use in later steps, the region between 300 and 700 bp in length was excised from the gel and the DNA extracted. This was the size selection step, which is purported to
increase the number of informative microsatellites [those over approximately 10
repeats (Ashley and Dow, 1994)] isolated by methods similar to the Glenn (2001)
protocol.
Vector Preparation
Vector preparation involved digestion of the pBluescript KS® + phagemid vector
with Bam HI, which has a recognition and restriction sequence:
5°-GLGATC -3’ 3- CTAGTG-5S eset
The ends produced by BamHI, as can be seen, are complementary to those produced by Dpn II and as such will allow the complementary binding of the two DNA strands together in a ligation reaction using T4-DNA ligase, if the ends of the vector are dephosphorylated, otherwise the DNA ligase cannot join the DNA
strands correctly.
 
Figure 3.6 Digested genomic DNA from samples HR 2/2 BA and HR 3/2 BA.
Lanes marked L contain 0.3 ug 100 bp ladder. The area marked with a box contains the regions extracted from the gel at the size selection step. The bright band half way down the ladder is 600 bp in size, bands above and below this are
in 100 bp increments. The regions excised for DNA extraction are marked by blue boxes.
Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector Ligations were performed between the digested genomic DNA and the digested,
dephosphorylated vector using T4-DNA ligase. A 1:1 ratio of vector to insert (genomic DNA) was initially trialed, however it was found that this did not give sufficient numbers of transformants at the transformation step (more blue colonies that white in a ratio of roughly 3:1). To improve the ligation efficiency, a ratio of 3:1 (insert to vector) was used. This gave an average of 63% white colonies per library plate. An empirical method of determining the efficiency of the ligation has not been established, although Sambrook et al. (1989) recommend electrophoresis of small portions of this to see the relative brightness of the bands
produced as re-circularised vector and vector with an insert in it should b different sizes. This method, however, will not give an exact measure of the
relative amounts of ligated vector and insert and non-ligated vector.
Competent Cell Preparation
Completion of the competent cell preparation required optimisation to obtain high transformation efficiencies. Attempts at making large quantities of competent cells were unsuccessful initially by a scaled-up Nishimura et al. (1990) method, possibly due to the cells warming too much during the re-suspension step thus losing their competency. This resulted in the cells having low competency and hence the transformation efficiency was low. When the preparation of competent cells had been optimised, for both methods, it was found that fresh preparations of competent cells were needed for a high transformation efficiency (~1 x10’ per Lg
insert DNA) using the modified Chung et al. (1989) method, despite the
recommendation of the paper that the cells can be stored in the 1x TSS buffer
(~5 x10° per Ug insert DNA after one week storage). In contrast, the Nishimura et
al (1990) method produced cells of high transformation efficiency both with fresh preparations (~8 xX 10’ per ug insert DNA) and with cells stored at -76°C (~3 x10’
per Lg insert DNA after two weeks storage), these values are taken from the
control three plates.
Heat Shock Transformations
Transformation efficiencies varied according to the volume of ligation reaction
added to the cells and by the competent cell preparation method used. It was
found that the optimal volume of ligation reaction to add to a 100 uL aliquot of competent cells was 5.0 L (data not shown). On average library transformation
efficiencies were approximately 5.5x 10°, with a range from 9.1x 10° to 1.5x 107. Upwards of 300 colonies could be found on many of the 90 mm diameter plates used for this step. Colony size was generally small, commonly being 1-2 mm in diameter, compared to the suggested colony size of 2-3 mm for these results (Glenn, 2001). This was attributed to the plates being too dry for proper growth of the cells. Small satellite colonies were also often observed on the plates,
especially surrounding blue colonies. These may have been due to old ampicillin,
however no change was noted when fresh stocks of ampicillin were used a sReesults
Insert Size Checks
Insert checks were performed by PCR amplification of the M13 multiple cloning site (M13 MCS) on the vector. This was performed to determine if the ligations had succeeded. Amplification was only performed on colonies that exhibited a white phenotype, indicating the presence of an insert in the vector. A typical gel from the insert checks is shown in Figure 3.7. Amplification of this region was
not always successful, as can be seen from the absence of a band in some lanes.
m™ 2 9 4 3 6°77 § 98 16 11.12 13 14°15 16 17 18
 
Figure 3.7 A typical gel from the insert checks, lanes 1 and 18 contain 0.3 ug 100 bp ladder (Life Technologies), the bright band at the top of the gel is 2072 bp, the band half way down the ladder 1s 600 bp. Lanes 2 - 17 contain the PCR products of the amplification of the M13 MCS in pBluescript KS® +. Negative and positive (amplified 10 ng of pUC 18 control plasmid) controls are not shown.
Early attempts at ligation and transformation produced average insert sizes of approximately 220 bp, although the size of the inserts ranged from 0 (no insert) to approximately 425 bp (650 - 223 bp). Only one out of the 60 white colonies picked contained no insert, although some appeared to have very small insert sizes (~100bp). This result is unexpected, as the average size of the insert should be between 300 and 700 bp as a result of the size selection step. These results suggest that shorter insert lengths may have been preferentially incorporated into the vector. This is because the shorter lengths of DNA produced by the restriction
reaction have a greater molar concentration of ends in solution, relative to the
larger fragments, thus there is preferential incorporation of the smaller fragment into the vector as the rate of reaction is controlled by the molar concentration of
ends in solution (Sambrook et al., 1989; Beckler et al., 1996).
Subsequent attempts at amplifying this region generated plasmids that contained
larger inserts. For example, amplification of the M13 MCS for the screening of
putative positive clones gave an average insert size of approximately 330 bp with
a range of 100-700, which is significantly higher than that seen for the first data
Set.
Lifting of White Colonies onto Filters Lifting of colonies onto filters is a routine step in most genomic library screening
procedures. To transfer the library onto a filter in such a manner that the DNA can later be bound to the filter involves careful handling of the plates and sensitive membranes. First of all the membrane must be placed carefully on the plate so
that all of the filter becomes wet, while excluding air bubbles, once this is
performed the plate and filter can be left to incubate at 4°C for several minutes.
The bacteria are then lysed by placing the filter colony side up on a mild detergent (10% SDS); at this stage, the surface of the filter becomes yellow with the digested cells. After this, the DNA is denatured to allow binding of the DNA to the positively charged membrane, performed on a saline base solution. The filter
is then placed on a neutralising solution that allows the DNA to bind to the filter and finally washed to remove excess bacterial proteins. After this, the filter is dried and the DNA more firmly bound to the filter by cross-linking with shortwave ultra-violet light (UV). The UV light breaks some of the DNA: DNA bonds
that have formed during the extraction process, creating sites with a negative charge that can bind to the positively charged filter by covalent bonds (Brown et
al., 1991). Six filters were lifted with a total of 1301 white colonies divided
between them.
Probing of Filters
There are two main steps to probing of the filters. The first step involves end labelling of oligonucleotides that are complementary to the sequences being screened for; in this case, this involved the use of y>P-ATP, a weak B emitter.
The second step involves the hybridisation of the labelled probes to the filters wep sResults
End-labelling of oligonucleotides is carried out by Polynucleotide Kinase (PNK) and enzyme that detaches the a and B phosphates from the nucleotide tri phosphate and uses the energy released by this process to catalyse the addition of
the remaining phosphate onto the 5” end of the oligonucleotide. For this reason a
y-labelled nucleotide-triphosphate is used in this reaction. There is no empirical method of determining the effectiveness of this reaction until after the
hybridisation and film development steps.
The effectiveness of a hybridisation is measured in the degree of background labelling of the filter, if none is detected, then the hybridisation can be termed a success. The hybridisations performed in this project showed little background hybridisation, but exhibited a high degree of non-specific hybridisation, with all or most of the colonies showing hybridisation, making it difficult to determine the presence or absence of positive clones. Some colonies however, showed as
significantly darker patches on the developed film (Figure 3.8), these were taken
as putative positive clones.
The first attempts at hybridisation were performed using (GA)7 and (GT);
oligonucleotide repeats using a 12 hour hybridisation and two washes as in 6x SSC, 0.1% SDS (R. J. Wilkins, pers. comm.). These probes failed to hybridise at all, even to definite (CA), and (CT), sequences amplified from mouse DNA, that
had been spotted on to a small piece of filter to test the hybridisation reaction.
Initial attempts at hybridisation with the 30-mer probes were performed using a twelve hour hybridisation and two washes as above. It was observed that the levels of non-specific hybridisation were high, thus making resolving of positive clones difficult. To avoid this problem, the hybridisation time was shortened to
one hour, with the same washes performed afterwards as recommended by Glenn (2001). The levels of non-specific hybridisation remained high. Thus for the final hybridisation protocol, more-stringent washes were performed after the one
hour hybridisation. In all subsequent hybridisations the filters were washed stringently in three washes firstly in 2x SSC, 0.5% SDS, secondly in 2x SSC, 0.1% SDS and finally in 0.1x SSC, 0.5% SDS, the first two at room temperature
and the final wash at the wash temperature (Table 2.2). This resulted in a lower
level of non-specific hybridisation, and showed 14 putative positive clone containing a (CT), (CA), or (GTT), repeat microsatellite sequences being probed for using (GA)js and (GT),5 (CAA)jo, y °P-dATP labelled oligonucleotides. Other oligonucleotide sequences were attempted in an effort to isolate microsatellite sequences from the clones. These sequences were (TA)j5, (TG)15 and (AGG)jo, hybridisation with these sequences produced no more putative positive clones. The reason for the absence of positive clones with these
sequences is not known as they are reported to be more frequent in plants than the
oligonucleotide probes initially used for these steps (Lagercrantz et al., 1993;
Morgante and Oliveri, 1993; Gupta et al., 1996).
Attempts were made to remove bound probe from the filters before a new probe (or combination of probes) was hybridised to the filters, initially this was a success, with little radioactivity exhibited by the filters when they were scanned with a Geiger counter (<100 counts per minute, data not shown). Failure to remove much of the probe at later washes was probably due to accumulation of the probe over several hybridisations, through the probe binding to the filter during the drying step. The drying step was necessary as the filter would
otherwise stick to the film while being exposed, if the filter was wrapped in plastic wrap (as filters with ‘2p are), the weak B-emission from the *3P would be
unable to penetrate the plastic, thus giving no result on the film.
Exposing and Developing Film Film exposure length was dependant on the amount of radioactivity exhibited by the hybridised filters; generally, the signal strength was weak enough that the
exposure times could take place over 16+ hours at room temperature. A typical
autoradiograph is shown in Figure 3.8 
 
Figure 3.8 Typical autoradigraph of a filter after hybridisation with a combination of (GA)is, (GT)1s and (CAA)jo radiolabelled oligonucleotides. Dark streaks represent colonies with non-specific hybridisation, “brighter bands” represent the putative positive clones. Clones picked for screening of putative positives are marked with circles, from bottom, anticlockwise around the filter, clones were numbered | — 4. Note the “12 o’clock” mark in the upper left and the sites of the needle holes (three spots) in the centre of the autoradiograph.
Screening Putative Positive Clones
The presence of putative microsatellite sequences in the cloned DNA, were indicated by the presence of very dark patches on the X-ray film. The corresponding clones, along with some that were not obviously positive (to act as a negative control for the next stage), were re-picked and grown overnight to
enable extraction of plasmid DNA and to make a glycerol stock of these clones.
Plasmids containing inserts were extracted from the putative positive clones (Figure 3.10) and the M13 multiple cloning site (M13 MCS) amplified with universal primers to estimate the size of the insert and to establish if it was possible to sequence the plasmid and obtain the insert. This step was necessary as occasionally the plasmid will incorporate an insert into regions outside the
M13 MCS due to non-specific cutting of the plasmid and as such is not easil wa séReessullts
sequenced as the total length of the plasmid is over 2000 bp, which is too long for
conventional dideoxy-sequencing methods.
Dug ee ee ee ee ieee ee Ree Gon ts De
 
Figure 3.9 M13 MCS PCR-products from picked putative positive clones. Lanes 1 — 14 represent picked clones 1- 14 from filters screened with (GA)5, (GT),5 and (CAA)i9. Lane 15 is a negative control and lane 16 contains a positive control
(amplification of 10 ng uncut pUC18). Lanes marked L contain 0.05 ug 100 bp ladder, the top band is 1517 bp in length, below this is a band at 1200 bp, followed by 1000 bp, all other bands are at 100 bp intervals. Note the double bands in lanes 9 and 12 as well as the very large band in lane 14.
Second, dot-blots of the M13 PCR products (from both dsDNA and direct from the bacteria) were hybridised to nylon filters and probed using the same labelled oligonucleotides as were used to probe the filters from which the clones were isolated. Dot-blots of the positive amplification products produced no result when hybridised with the same probes used to identify the original positive clones. It can be assumed from this that there were no microsatellite sequences present in the clones isolated as positives. The number of false positives seen in the probing step may be a result of the small difference between a signal and non-specific
binding of the radio-labelled probes used to screen the colonies.
Double-Stranded DNA Extraction dsDNA was extracted using a modified X-Gen method (Appendix 3), in which the
bacterial cells are pelleted and then re-suspended in a pre-lysis buffer. After this,
the cells are lysed in alkali, the solution neutralised and the protein debri ee eee sess
removed. DNA is precipitated with cold ethanol, pelleted and re-suspended in
water or TE buffer.
During this process, several steps have obvious products; the lysis step results in the clearing of the cell suspension, due to the lysis of the cells, the solution also becomes very viscous from the high levels of denatured protein in solution. The neutralisation step results in the proteins “salting out” of solution forming a visible white precipitate, which is removed by centrifugation. Precipitation of the
DNA produces and instant gelatinous layer in the solution, this is the DNA
coming out of solution, incubation at -20°C aids this process, resulting in a higher yield of DNA. Re-suspension of the plasmid DNA from the bacteria requires only a short re-suspension period, otherwise co-precipitated genomic DNA will re suspend as well, causing the plasmid preparation to be impure, making subsequent
amplification and sequencing of the plasmid difficult (Figure 3.10).
 
Figure 3.10 Double stranded plasmid DNA isolates from bacteria containing putative positive microsatellite clones. The large bright mass is genomic DNA from the bacteria; the smaller band below this is the plasmid (enclosed in the box). Variation in the degree of migration of this band 1s due to size differences
of the insert. Note single band in lane 13.
As can be seen from the plasmid extracts below (Figure 3.10), there is a range of sizes of insert in the vectors, giving the variation in the migration of the smaller
bands with electrophoresis. Note lane 13, which should be compared to lane 14 in
Figure 3.9, as one plasmid extract failed to work. Lane 13 has no large brigh The amplification product of the M13 MCS for this band resulted in the large
band seen in land 14 of Figure 3.9. Thus, it can be assumed that the band seen in
lane 13 of the plasmid extracts, is the plasmid.
MP-PCR DEVELOPMENT
RAPD-based microsatellite development followed a modified Weising et al. (1995) protocol, in this the microsatellite regions were amplified using a microsatellite oligonucleotide as a primer in what is similar to a RAPD reaction, but is known as MP-PCR (Ramser et al., 1997a), using the PCR conditions of Balakrishna (1995). As the system of Weising et al. (1995) required only the use microsatellite oligonucleotide, and involved Southern blotting of the resulting gel to enable the isolation of microsatellite sequences, it was decided to attempt to isolate microsatellites through the use of a RAPD reaction that used a RAPD primer, along with a microsatellite oligonucleotide as primers in a single reaction. It was reasoned that this system should produce banding patterns that were different from those that would be seen in a standard RAPD reaction. Isolation of those bands that contain microsatellites would be possible through running a standard RAPD reaction (primed using the same RAPD primer as was used in the MP-PCR) concurrently on the gel next to the reaction primed with the microsatellite oligonucleotide. This system should show those bands that are different between the two reactions, allowing isolation of the different bands for
cleaning and sequencing.
Initially to establish whether the standard RAPD protocols could amplify the genomic DNA when a microsatellite sequence was used as a primer, RAPD reactions were set up with the microsatellite sequence as a sole primer. The products from this reaction were seen as high molecular weight smears (>2000 bp) on the gel with some faint and indistinct bands between 1500 and 500 bp (Figure 3.11). Bornet and Branchard (2001) found in a similar situation, that the smear was not due to non-specific primer binding, but rather due to high levels of PCR-product, for this they performed annealing temperature optimisation. However, I suspect that the smear in this case is due to non-specific binding as the annealing temperature in the reaction was 37°C, this is 11°C below the Wallace
temperature (Wallace et al., 1979), potentially resulting in a high level of non ee sReesullts
specific primer binding, also too the smears did not disappear when a lower
volume of PCR-product was loaded on the gel (Bornet and Branchard, 2001).
 
Figure 3.11 PCR-products of RAPD reactions primed with a (CAA).
microsatellite oligonucleotide. Lanes 1 — 4 contain amplified DNA from samples HR 1/2 BA, HR 2/1 BA, HR 2/2 BA, HR 3/2 BA. Lanes 5 and 6 contain positive
(Pittosporum cornifolium) and negative controls respectively. Lane marked L
contains 0.05 uL 100 bp ladder, top ladder band is 1517 bp in length followed by 1200, and then 1000, all other bands in the ladder are at 100 bp intervals. Note faint bands in the sample lanes marked with arrows.
Unfortunately, time constraints did not allow this avenue to be researched further. It would be interesting to see what a Southern blot of the smears would look like
compared to the gel product.
It is not known why the MP-PCR reactions failed to work, but it is suggested that the primer lengths were too long to act as non-specific primers at the temperatures used for annealing. Other potential reasons include there being a very low incidence of microsatellite sequences in the genome of the samples used for this experiment. Other protocols performing similar methods with A/T rich primers and dinucleotide primers found that some samples produced smears similar to
those seen above, and that it was not possible to optimise these reactions further
(Weising et al., 1995) DISCUSSION
 
GENOMIC DNA EXTRACTION
A protocol for DNA extraction, such as that produced by Rogers and Bendich (1985), is essential for situations where the sample size is small and the samples valuable in some manner. The ability to extract high yields of DNA from small samples reduces the risk of losing all or most of a sample from an error during the extraction process. The yields obtained using this protocol were variable (see
Figure 3.1) according to the amount of tissue used for the extraction. This may
have been due to the transfer of the ground sample from the mortar and pestle to a
1.5 mL tube as the amount of tissue transferred could have varied as some may have stuck to the mortar while the tissue was defrosting. This was probably mostly due to the low temperature of the mortar and pestle from being immersed in liquid nitrogen, condensing water out of the atmosphere and wetting the tissue thus making it adhere to the mortar. At the first chloroform: iso-amyl] alcohol (C:1 extraction step some DNA may also have been lost due to particles of the ground tissue being less dense than the C:I mixture, and thus forming a dense mat of tissue in the aqueous layer. This lowered the amount of aqueous layer, containing dissolved DNA that could be transferred to the next step, as minimal amounts of
tissue should be transferred to the later steps of the extraction.
The main difficulty with extraction of DNA from plants is the high polysaccharide content of the cells. The polysaccharides make up the majority of the cell wall and as sugars, are often co-extracted with the DNA (Murray and Thompson, 1980; Porebski et al., 1997). This problem, along with the tendency of secondary compounds, such as polyphenolics, to co-precipitate with the DNA is often a major problem in DNA extraction and further use of the DNA, such as PCR, which can be inhibited by these compounds (Li et al., 1994). Often it is necessary to remove these compounds by further purification of the stock DNA by further phenol: chloroform: iso-amy alcohol extractions (Dellaporta et al., 1983). Mosses are simple plants, producing little in the way of secondary compounds, and having a simple cell wall structure. For this reason the extraction of DNA from these plants
is relatively easy, and the DNA obtained is usually “clean” in that it contains littl in the way of polysaccharides or secondary compounds. The purity of a sample can
be determined by the ratio of the absorbance at 260 and 280 nm, with a ratio of 1.8 indicating pure DNA, higher values indicate RNA contamination and lower values indicate salt or phenol contamination. For example, the DNA extracts used for microsatellite development had an average ratio of 1.714, indicating that the DNA extracted was reasonably pure. As phenol was not used in the extraction, the values
obtained may indicate that polyphenolic-secondary compounds were present
(Sambrook et al., 1989).
FUNGAL DETECTION
Internal Transcribed Spacer Regions (ITS)
Hunger (2000) performed a study on the molecular phylogentics of Antarctic and New Zealand Bryum species, using the ITS region as a marker to determine the relationships between Antarctic (Victoria Land) Bryum species and those from Australia and New Zealand. The findings were that there was a high degree of similarity between B. argenteum from New Zealand, B. subrotundifolium from Australia, and the B. subrotundifolium/argenteum complex from Antarctica. Seppelt and Green (1998) classified Victoria Land specimens of this complex as B.
subrotundifolium, a classification based on the morphological characters of the
specimens collected by the authors, and through careful comparison of the features of the plants in culture. It was found that many of the characteristics of B. argenteum, such as the silvery colour of the leaves and colourless hyaline cells in the upper part of the leaf disappeared when grown under culture conditions, leaving plants that closely resembled B. subrotundifolium (Seppelt and Green, 1998). Hunger (2000) also noted the presence of two distinct morphotypes of B. subrotundifolium at Cape Hallett. One is similar to B. subrotundifolium, with silver-yellow appearance and the other is also silvery, but of a much darker green, more similar to B. argenteum in superficial appearance, but each had identical ITS sequences, implying that these were morphotypes of the same species. Skotnicki et
al., (1997) present some molecular data that B. argenteum may also be present in
the Ross Sea region.
As a tool for analysing the contamination of plant DNA with fungal DNA, the ITS regions are ideal markers as the different products of the amplification for the ITS
regions are very different sizes in the plant and in the fungus (Hunger, 2000). Thi can be seen in the amplification of a contaminating DNA in the Antarctic moss
analysis performed as part of this study (Figure 3.4). PCR Amplification of the ITS region in Bryum argenteum, results in a product that is approximately 1100 bp,
whereas the fungal contaminant (Phoma sp., Hunger, 2000) an amplification
product of approximately 550 bp. This size disparity of the two PCR products
allowed the determination of the presence of fungal contaminants in the moss DNA extracted from Antarctic samples. Samples extracted from sites outside Antarctica were also subjected to the same examination as the Antarctic samples, and it was found that the incidence of fungal contaminant DNA being present in samples from outside Antarctica was very low. The reasons for this are not known. It can be speculated that the high incidence of fungal contaminants observed in continental Antarctica is because, as mosses are one of the few potential habitats for the fungus; as they provide a food source and are commonly found in damp areas, which is ideal fungal habitat (Hunger, 2000). This would explain why the majority of the fungi observed have been saprophytic in nature (Block, 1984). As to why the incidence of fungi seen growing on moss outside Antarctica is so low; the growth and survival rates of mosses is much higher in temperate climates, thus it may be that the fungi are still present, but at lower levels as there is less dead moss tissue for the fungus to inhabit. It could also be that sampling has an affect on this, in that
samples taken in temperate climates are normally taken from the healthy growing shoots, where there is likely to be little dead tissue for the fungi, thus fungi are
poorly represented in the samples taken.
ITS markers were initially developed in fungi (White et al., 1990) making this marker ideal for determination of the presence of fungal DNA contaminants in the extracted moss DNA. However, the amplification conditions and binding sites of the primers of this region are such that not all potential contaminants will be amplified by the ITS primers used. For example, Nostoc sp. (Cyanobacteria) and Prasiola crispa (Chlorophyta, incertae sedis) are commonly found to be growing in and around moss patches on continental Antarctica (pers. obs., Figure 4.1). Thus, while it is generally possible to remove obvious patches of these organisms from the mosses before DNA extraction, there are still likely to be cells from them on the moss as it is being extracted. Why they are not amplified concurrently, as the fungi
are, is unknown, but may be due to low levels being present in the samples
extracted 
a el
a = bd
 
a
Figure 4.1 Bryum subrotundifolium (silvery yellow) overgrown with Nostoc (black patches in foreground) and Prasiola crispa (bright green patches in foreground) on
Beaufort Island, collection site of samples BI A/1 BS — BI G/7 BS. Scale: middle distance covers approximately 5 m width.
Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
RAPD-PCR, despite the inherent simplicity of the idea, is a difficult technique to optimise and achieve reproducibility. Factors that are critical for consistent production of reproducible bands are magnesium chloride concentration, primer concentration, DNA _ polymerase (7aq) concentration and sample DNA concentration (Grosberg et al., 1996). Also critical is the annealing temperature;
Williams et al. (1990) in their original paper on this topic used an annealing
temperature of 36°C, calculated on the basis of the Wallace rule: [Ty = 2 (number
of A or T) + 4 (number of G or C)] (Wallace et al., 1979). It has been found in subsequent studies, that this temperature is optimal for the majority of RAPD
reactions (Operon Technologies Inc., 10-mer kits, product information). An
annealing temperature of 45°C was used in the RAPD reactions for this study,
which is 13° above the Wallace temperature and may help eliminate spurious banding patterns, however, see Figure 3.5 and comments. The optimal DNA concentration for RAPD reactions is 25 ng per reaction (Williams et al., 1990), thus it is often convenient to make all stock DNA to a concentration of 10 ng wL”’. It is
essential for RAPD analysis of populations, that consistent conditions are used to
produce and analyse the banding patterns. It is also essential that the bandin patterns be consistently amplified between reactions for the samples being
analysed. It has been found, that using identical conditions, even down to the make of PCR machine used, that there are large inconsistencies in the production of banding patterns between laboratories and within laboratories (Meunier and Grimont, 1993). There can be also be differences in the bands resolved between individual workers (Jones et al., 1997; Saunders et al., 2001). Thus are many factors that can affect the banding patterns produced by RAPD-PCR, and therefore it is essential before any RAPD analysis is undertaken, to determine the reproducibility of the banding between reactions, and to score only those bands that are found to be consistently amplified. For example, compare lanes 1 and 5 in Figure 3.5, where the same moss DNA sample was used in the RAPD reaction, but lane 5 includes fungal DNA as well, very bright bands can be seen in lane 5 that are
moss based, but are not seen in lane 1.
For determining the presence of a contaminant, as in this study, RAPDs can be a useful tool, provided bands can be consistently reproduced. However, Black IV (1996) found that arbitrarily primed-PCR analysis was “completely inappropriate” for detection of micro-organisms or minute organisms in host tissues, although no reasons for this statement are given. It was found that the reproduction of bands in moss DNA that also contained fungal DNA was problematic. This may have been because the binding temperature for the primer to the fungal DNA could not be optimised without shifting the moss DNA binding temperature from its optimum. Binding temperature in RAPD reactions is known to be critical for reproduction of banding patterns (Ellsworth et al., 1993). This problem was never fully overcome; all RAPD-PCR products from moss DNA with fungal DNA present produced a high level of background and many un-resolvable bands. The ‘spiked’ samples however showed some characteristics of both the moss and fungal patterns. This may have been because the fungal DNA was at a sufficiently low concentration that only the brightest bands from its pattern showed up, while the moss DNA was at a
sufficiently high concentration that the banding pattern was recognisable (Figure
3.5).
Contamination problems plague RAPD analyses (Figure 3.5). This is primarily due to the low specificity of the primers used in this reaction. It has been observed that
even bacteria will produce RAPD patterns, which, with the small genome of thes organisms, is unexpected. Some authors take the patterns produced by bacteria as an indicator that the annealing temperatures commonly used for RAPD reactions are so low that non-specific binding occurs. This is a particular problem with short
primer lengths and is one of the reasons that RAPD-PCR has such large
reproducibility difficulties. It has also been observed that some reagents will produce banding patterns that cannot be eliminated. For example, Meunier and
Grimont (1993) found that particular brands of Tag DNA polymerase produced
natural contamination. Presumably, this is due to incomplete purification of the DNA polymerase, resulting in residual amounts of DNA in the enzyme. Meunier and Grimont (1993) also note that this is unlikely to affect an analysis as the banding pattern from the Taq DNA polymerase is unlikely to match any pattern
produced in an analysis.
It is known that the species being studied for this project have low genetic variability for the ITS region of nrDNA (Hunger, 2000). In contrast to this, Skotnicki et al., (1998a, b, c) in a variety of studies found high levels of polymorphism in RAPD (random amplified polymorphic DNA) studies, even at the shoot level on individual plants, there seemed to be some genetic variation. Their findings were that the intra-population variability accounted for up to 75% of the variation observed and inter-population variability was approximately 25%. An interesting point of note is that; some, if not a large proportion of this variability may be due to fungal-DNA contamination of the moss DNA during extraction. This phenomenon has been observed by Hunger et al. (in prep), and has resulted in successful attempts to isolate fungi from Antarctic mosses. How much of the variation observed is attributable to the fungal contamination 1s unclear, and further
work 1s needed in this area for that reason.
MICROSATELLITE DEVELOPMENT
Microsatellites need to be isolated from an organism under study for the first time. As microsatellites are usually found in the non-coding regions of the genome, it is often difficult to design universal primers, such as those found for more conserved regions (e.g. the ITS region of ribosomal DNA). It is uncommon to be able to amplify sequences that have diverged more than 10 - 20 million years (Zane et al.,
2002), but it is usually possible to amplify microsatellites in other closely relate species from within a genus and occasionally within the same family (Schlotterer et
al., 1991; Ellegren et al., 1995; Dayanandan et al., 1997: Karhu et al., 2000).
Microsatellite Development Techniques
The number of microsatellites isolated using different techniques varies according to the species and the technique. At a basic level, the majority of microsatellite isolation protocols can be classified into four different types; 1) traditional protocols in which microsatellites are isolated from partial genome libraries, which have been selected for small insert size, such as the protocol used in this project (Glenn, 2001). 2) Enrichment protocols in which the frequency of microsatellite sequences in a library is enhanced by primer extension (and enrichment using uracil in the place of thiamine) (e.g. Ostrander et al., 1992). 3) Selective hybridisation, in which the genomic DNA is digested, ligated to a known sequence and then
hybridised to a filter-bound probe. The bound DNA fragments are then eluted from the filter and amplified by means of the known sequences. After this, further cloning and hybridisation steps are required to select the microsatellite sequences (e.g. Kandpal et al., 1994). 4) RAPD-based methods, in which genomic DNA is amplified by a standard RAPD reaction, screened by hybridisation with microsatellite repeat containing oligonucleotide probes, and then using selective cloning of positive bands, isolate the microsatellite containing sequence (e.g. Weising et al., 1995, Ender et al., 1996). Each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages, based around the time involved, the complexity of the procedure, the efficiency of the procedure, and the expense involved. Traditional methods are costly to set up, time consuming and have a low efficiency, especially if the organism being investigated has a low level of microsatellite sequences (Zane et al., 2002). Enrichment protocols are also expensive to set up, but the efficiency is relatively high and the time taken to isolate sequences is low. Selective hybridisation protocols are similar to enrichment protocols in all cost, efficiency and time respects. RAPD-based protocols are the cheapest and fastest method available, however the yield is variable and the time spent optimising the RAPD reactions before microsatellite isolation can be high. Thus, it can be seen that there is little point in performing a traditional protocol for microsatellite development in
a species such as a moss, given the low incidence of microsatellite sequences found
in these organisms In this study, attempts were made to isolate microsatellite sequences from New
Zealand B. argenteum DNA for use on Antarctic B. subrotundifolium, as these species are thought to be conspecific (Hunger, 2000). The incidence of microsatellites in mosses is a little studied field, indeed only one group (to the knowledge of the author), has studied moss microsatellites at all. This study was performed by van der Velde et al. (2000, 2001a, b) and van der Velde and Bijlsma (2000, 2001) on the genus Polytrichum, producing a variety of papers relating to the genetic structure of the genus (van der Velde et al., 2001b), the allodiploid origin of particular species (van der Velde and Bijlsma, 2001) and the reproductive biology
of P. formosum (van der Velde et al., 2001a). The findings of these studies were
that the incidence of microsatellites and levels of polymorphism were low, when compared to those found in other higher plant groups (van der Velde et al., 2001b), and that the inter-generic applicability of the markers developed was low (van der Velde and Bijlsma, 2001). van der Velde et al. (2001b) came to the conclusion that the low levels of genetic variability found in P. formosum were probably due to the haploid life style of this species. The low genetic variability of mosses in general, is probably due to the dominant haploid stage, which means that deleterious alleles are likely to be directly selected against (Longton, 1976; Shaw, 1991) and consequently removed from the population. The implications of this on the study undertaken as part of this thesis, are that there are low levels of microsatellites in mosses, thus the development of the markers is likely to be difficult as the chance of isolating a microsatellite from any organism is low (Zane et al., 2002) but that a microsatellite isolated from a different Bryum species should amplify in the one being investigated. However, it has been found that while mosses are haploid for the majority of their life cycle, there is some evidence that a large proportion of mosses are ancient polyploids, thus 1t may be that the mosses are functionally
diploid, while in a haploid stage (gametophyte) of the life cycle (Shaw, 1991).
In general, isolation of any particular sequence from a genome is dependant on the abundance of that sequence in the genome. Mosses with a haploid genome may have a lower frequency of microsatellite sequence due to the fact that half of the genome is missing, compared to higher plants. This may have an implication on the figures seen in the results of van der Velde et al. (2001b), in that the figures are a direct reflection of the amount of genome present. This finding is also backed up
by the difficulty seen in isolating microsatellite sequences from the moss specie being studied for this project. Also underlying some of the difficulty is that not all
microsatellite sequences isolated will be polymorphic.
The failure of this project to isolate microsatellite sequences, may not be due entirely to the low incidence of microsatellites in moss species, but may also be due to the haploid genetic content of the specimens studied. Mosses have a two-stage life cycle, with the dominant stage being the haploid gametophyte (Watson, 1968) This has the implication that there is half the genetic content of the organism present at the dominant stage, when compared to diploid organisms. This may have a bearing on this study in that given a low incidence of microsatellites in mosses, it may be that there is half the probability of isolating such a sequence when investigating a haploid organism as compared to a diploid organism. This possibility has not been investigated quantitatively to the knowledge of the author. Another reason for the failure may be that the protocol used suggests performing an entire genomic library screening procedure before attempting any enrichment. This may decrease the incidence of microsatellite isolation to lower than 0.04 to 12%
positive clones isolated from genomic library (Zane et al., 2002).
Ligation of Genomic DNA into the Vector
Experimental difficulties in the practical component of this study meant that the isolation of microsatellite sequences was not possible. The experimental difficulties experienced were at three critical stages; first of all, in the ligation steps, in which the digested genomic DNA of the mosses was inserted into the vector (pBluescript KS® +). Optimal DNA concentrations are required for this step; necessitating the quantitation of both the stock digested DNA and the prepared vector (Beckler et al., 1996). This was performed on an EagleEye II DNA gel
documentation system using the concentration calculation sub-programme on the
Eaglesight software (version 3.2, Stratagene), based on the Saran™ wrap method of Sambrook et al. (1989). Because the amounts of DNA present in the solutions, as estimated by the calculation, were similar to those obtained from a DNA fluorometer at the University of Waikato Sequencing Unit, thus the EagleEye system was used for all remaining DNA concentration estimations. However, a recent study conducted in the same laboratory has found that the system used is inaccurate (P. Poletti and L. A. Hathaway, pers. comm.), thus the DNA levels
present in the samples may have been wrongly estimated. According to th protocol, the optimal ligation contained 200 ng of insert and 75 ng of vector, which
would produce an approximately equal number of cohesive ends in both the insert
and vector. If the concentrations estimated above were incorrect, lower amounts of
each would have been present in the ligation reactions, thus making them
sub-optimal and hence making the later steps more difficult.
Heat Shock Transformations Despite the possibility of having sub-optimal ligations, the transformation efficiencies of the competent cells ranged from 9.1x 10° to 1.5x 10’ with the
number of white colonies on the library plates out-numbering the blue colonies, by approximately 2:1, as expected. The transformation step was the second problematic step in the development. Transformations took place using two methods, a modified Chung et al. (1989) and following Nishimura et al. (1991). For both of these protocols heat shock transformation was used to facilitate the uptake of the ligated plasmid and insert into the bacteria. It was found during initial trials that the use of electroporation was difficult to master, and that the unreliability of this procedure made it impractical to use this for the large number of transformations required. The modified Chung et al. (1989) method followed closely the system described in this paper, although there were differences in the procedures used (G. Jacobsen, pers. comm.). For example, the cells with the added
ligation reaction products were not incubated for the suggested 10 minutes, but
were incubated at 4°C for 20-30 minutes and then heat-shocked. It was found
generally that the transformation efficiencies from this protocol were lower than
those produced by the Nishimura et al. (1991) protocol. For this second method, it was found that the use of magnesium- and glucose-supplemented LB-broth gave the highest transformation efficiencies, as the cells were able to grow at a high rate and the magnesium enhanced the permeability of the cell membranes, allowing
greater uptake of the DNA during the transformation (Hanahan, 1985).
Probing of Filters
Hybridisations, the third problematic step, and end-labelling of oligonucleotides with yP-ATP were at first unsuccessful due to the probe lengths being too short to
allow binding of the probes to the complementary sequences. For this reason,
longer oligonucleotides were used in later reactions. It was found that when these
longer sequences were hybridised to the nylon filters, that the incidence o non-specific hybridisation was quite high, making it difficult to distinguish between positive clones and clones that had hybridised non-specifically to the
oligonucleotides. It is not known why the level of non-specific hybridisation was so high. Experimentation with the washing procedure based on the protocol supplied in Sambrook et al. (1989) resulted in lower levels of non-specific
hybridisation, although this was not quantifiable. It is presumed that the lower the
stringency during the washing procedure, the higher the level of background and non-specific hybridisation will be (Sambrook et al., 1989). Nylon filters are known to have lower noise: signal ratio (Sambrook et al., 1989) and this may be reflected in the results obtained. The use of *°P as a radioactive label was made on the premise that this isotope is more stable (half life of 25.14 days), and less dangerous to handle than °’P. However, it was found that with this isotope the filters could not be washed efficiently to remove probes that had already been hybridised to them. This was because the weak B-emission of the *°P isotope will not penetrate liquid layers or plastic, hence it was necessary to dry the filters before exposing them to film, to prevent the filters sticking to the film. Drying of the filters supposedly irreversibly binds the DNA probe to the filter (Sambrook et al., 1989), however it was found that the majority of bound probe could be removed by washing the filters
in boiling 0.5% SDS (Amersham International plc, Hybond™-N” product
information sheet).
Double-Stranded DNA Extraction and Screening Putative Positive Clones
Further experimental difficulties were experienced with the amplification of the M13 multiple cloning site (M13 MCS), in which some samples that contained an insert failed to amplify either directly from the genomic DNA or from the lysed bacteria in water mixes. The failure to amplify in some cases may have been due to a low level of DNA in the DNA solution added to the PCR. However, in these cases all the samples that were picked as putative positive clones grew in fresh selective media, indicating that the amplification was not due to the bacteria losing the plasmid. Plasmid extracts from fresh cultures of the picked DNA resulted in some of the samples amplifying as expected, but other samples which had previously
amplified from the water/bacteria mix produced double bands or failed to amplify
again Double stranded DNA was extracted from the bacteria in the form of plasmids. The plasmid preparation procedures are designed to extract the plasmids by differential denaturation of the different types of DNA in the bacterial cell. This happens through the use of alkali, which disrupts the base pairing of the linear genomic DNA denaturing it, but the closed circular plasmid DNA are unable to separate
from each other because they are topologically intertwined (Sambrook et al., 1989).
This allows the genomic DNA to be removed from the extraction in a dissolved
form, leaving the plasmid DNA. As can be seen from Figure 3.10, the total removal of genomic DNA has not occurred, which is possibly acting as an inhibitor in the PCR of the M13 MCS, by being at a much greater concentration in the solution than the plasmid DNA, thus physically preventing the primers and Tag DNA polymerase from binding. It is possible that this result is due to inexperience in the preparation of plasmid DNA, as acommon result of inexperience is that the DNA is
resistant to cleavage by restriction enzymes (Sambrook et al., 1989), an analogous
situation to PCR where the polymerase also has to bind to the DNA.
In summary, the modifications and optimisations made to the procedure were the result of lack of experience of the various techniques attempted. To isolate microsatellite sequences from the mosses it would be more practical to use an enrichment procedure that follows either, a primer extension method or uracil enrichment, which should increase the likelihood of isolating a microsatellite
sequence.
DISPERSAL
For the purposes of further research, microsatellites isolated from Antarctic Bryum species could potentially answer the question of dispersal (i.e. where the mosses come from), as well as proving or disproving the theory of refugia being present on the mainland during the last glacial maximum (Llano, 1965). If refugia did exist, the expected genetic diversity would be very low, given that there is no sexual reproduction, and that all the populations in a given area are likely to have dispersed from one refugium, rather than many. On the other hand, if the moss flora of Antarctica is due to more recent colonisation events, it 1s to be expected that there would be relatively high levels of genetic diversity among populations and
localities, such as have been found in RAPD analyses of Antarctic samples
(Skotnicki, et al., 1997; 1998a, b, c Within continental Antarctica, there have been few studies on the dispersal of moss species, however, there have been several papers discussing this topic in the
maritime Antarctic, especially Signy Island and the Ongul Islands (Lewis-Smith, 1997; Marshall and Convey, 1997). The findings of these papers are in general that
mosses within Antarctica can disperse by two methods, first of all by spores, as is common amongst many moss species, and secondly by asexual means such as gemmae or easily detached axilliary buds (Steere, 1965; Ochi, 1979; Lewis-Smith, 1997; Seppelt and Green, 1998). Each of these types is probabaly primarily dispersed by a different method, spores are mostly dispersed by wind and propagules are mostly dispersed by water (Lewis-Smith, 1997). This was studied on James Ross Island, for several species. Those that reproduced sexually and were able to develop mature sporophytes, showed a correlation with wind direction, in the number of plants found down-wind of the point source for the mosses (a seal carcass). Those that were found to be reproducing entirely asexually showed a
correlation for dispersal with the gentle slope on which the carcass lay
Lewis-Smith, 1997).
The question of dispersal structures in Antarctica is interesting, as the climate is harsh, it 1s to be expected that, unless an organism uses a very resistant dispersal structure, then the chances of it dispersing a large distance are small (Broady et al., 1987). From the studies of Lewis-Smith (1997) it is likely that mosses within Antarctica are mostly dispersing via propagules such as axilliary buds or bulbils (but see van der Velde et al., 20014), fairly heavy structures, that are quite resistant and could potentially be transported on the feet and feathers of skuas (Lewis-Smith, 1997), although no studies of this have been performed. Wind and water are likely to be the most effective dispersal mechanisms, though no known fresh water sources on continental Antarctica travel more than a few kilometres (e.g. the Onyx river, Taylor Valley) and salt water is an unlikely prospect, as the salt content would kill the propagules, although rafting on sea ice is a possibility. All the same, the study of Lewis-Smith (1997) found that moss dispersal via propagules was closely correlated to water flow patterns along slopes. Dispersal by spores is possible for those species that can produce spores under the conditions found in continental Antarctica. Spore dispersal was found to be strongly correlated with
wind patterns (Lewis-Smith, 1997). It is to be expected that spore dispersal is no the main mechanism of gene flow within continental Antarctica as the incidence of
sporophytes is at best, infrequent, and maturation of the sporophytes such that the
spores are still viable is very rare (Greene, 1962).
There is evidence for wind dispersal of vegetative propagules within Antarctica (Marshall and Convey, 1997; M. I. Stevens, pers. comm.), although the distances
over which these can travel is not known, it is presumably related to the wind
velocity. A quantitative study of this, similar to that of Stevens et al. (2002 in press)
for Collembola, would establish the frequency of such events as well as the amounts of propagules being dispersed over a given time. Lewis-Smith (1997) and van der Velde et al. (2001b) found that the distribution of spores and propagules from a source followed a leptocurtic curve, with the vast majority of dispersal structures falling close to the source, and only a tiny proportion landing far away from the source. Obviously these curves were substantially different for the type of structure being dispersed, spores being less dense covered much greater distances
than those travelled by propagules (Lewis-Smith, 1997).
MP-PCR DEVELOPMENT
The microsatellite-primed PCR failed to amplify any distinct bands in the mosses
examined; instead smears were observed on the gel with the majority of the molecular weight being over 2000 bp in size. Some faint and indistinct bands of smaller size, resembling RAPD patterns were seen in the lower half of the gels run. These bands are presumably the equivalent of the banding patterns produced in a RAPD reaction, but at a lower incidence of occurrence as the microsatellite oligonucleotide used to prime these reactions is longer in sequence and less likely to have complementary sequences in the genomic to which to bind. Gupta et al. (1994) found that some samples produced smears with di-nucleotide and some tri-nucleotide oligonucleotides used as primers, and there was little polymorphism
exhibited in those species that did produce banding patterns with these primers.
The specimens used for this were the New Zealand Bryum argenteum samples that
were also used for the microsatellite development. There may be many reasons
why the MP-PCR failed to amplify any bands in these samples. Primarily it was
probably due to inappropriate methodology, which was unable to be resolved due to
time constraints Other reasons why this experiment failed to work may be that the incidence of microsatellites in the mosses is particularly low, as found by van der Velde et al.
(2000; 2001), this would mean that the incidence of binding of the microsatellite
oligonucleotide used as a primer to the genomic DNA was very low, resulting in the
lack of bands seen on the agarose gels after electrophoresis. The number of binding sites for a random primer of 14 bp length is expected to be one every 4'* bp which equals one every 268435456 bp, hence it is to be expected that there are approximately 18 binding sites in a genome of 5x 10” bp, which is approximately average size for a diploid plant genome) thus the chance of the genome containing several binding sites less than 3000 bp apart that are in an inverted orientation
(Hadrys et al., 1992) is low, suggesting that shorter oligonucleotide primers (10 bp
or less) should have been used.
The primers used in these cases were (GA)7 and (CAA). , which from the literature may be at a low incidence in plants, however, similar sequences of microsatellite oligonucleotide have been successfully used in other studies on plants (Matioli and deBrito, 1995; Weising et al., 1995; Ender et al., 1996; Ramser et al., 1997a; Ramser et al., 1997b; Bornet and Branchard, 2001). Despite the difficulties observed in this study, van der Velde et al. (2000) managed to isolate microsatellites from the genus Polytrichum using a (GA)7 oligonucleotide primer.
Which may give an indication that the PCR conditions were not correct for the
MP-PCR performed using the (GA)7 sequence.
FUTURE RESEARCH
It is to be recommended that in the future, this work be carried to completion as a part of a higher degree such as part of a PhD or an MPhil. This is more likely to be successful as the methodological development stage is particularly long and difficult. In addition, at this stage, very few Masters students will have had any laboratory experience with cloning, hybridisations or worked with phage-transfection of bacteria, all of which require extensive knowledge of the various difficulties and inherent problems with such techniques. Also acquiring the knowledge and experience necessary to work with these techniques is time
consuming, which makes completion of a difficult project such as this in the time
required for an MSc, very difficult Completion of the Glenn (2001) protocol will involve obtaining positive clones
from which useful microsatellites can be obtained, this requires the microsatellite to be surrounded by enough flanking regions such that primers can be designed. Once primers are designed, it is possible to test the microsatellite for variation within the populations. If the microsatellites developed are polymorphic, they can be used for full-scale population genetic analysis. Data can be collected from polyacrylamide gels similar to those used for DNA sequencing, in which the products are denatured so that the mutations in sequence length (alleles) can be observed. Data can be analysed using appropriate data analysis packages, such as PAUP* (Swofford, 1998) or Phylip (Felsenstein, 1993) to produce dendrograms of the relatedness of
the populations.
It is also to be recommended that different methods of isolation be attempted, such as the MP-PCR method discussed above. Such a method has the potential to be a rapid, efficient and ultimately successful method of finding and _ isolating microsatellites from species that have inherently low levels of microsatellites. Such a method also would require less knowledge of many different processes, making the task easier and more manageable for a Masters student. There are many other methods of microsatellite development, that vary in the number and complexity of the steps required for isolation of the sequences. The Glenn (2001) protocol is laborious and of low efficiency (Zane et al., 2002), making the isolation of
microsatellites from microsatellite impoverished species such as mosses, difficult CHAPTER 5
SUMMARY
 
Mosses are the most abundant vascular plant group in continental Antarctica. Much taxonomic confusion has occurred in the classification of Bryum species in Antarctica, especially regarding B. subrotundifolium (sensu lato) and how this relates to B. argenteum, a morphologically very similar species. ITS studies on Antarctic Bryum samples have found that samples from Antarctica classified as B. subrotundifolium and B. argenteum form one clade with samples of both species from Australia and New Zealand, thus suggesting that B argenteum and B. subrotundifolium are morphological variants of the same species, at least as far as
Antarctic specimens are classified (Hunger, 2000). This should be investigated
further to ascertain the taxonomic status of these taxa.
Dispersal of mosses within Antarctica has not been investigated closely, but it is hypothesised that the main means of dispersal by non-fruiting mosses such as B. subrotundifolium, is via propagules, which are dispersed by wind and water. This mechanism of dispersal implies that unless there has been long-term separation of sites where mosses are found, all the populations are likely to be closely related, provided they are from one founding plant. The question of whether the presentday flora is composed of recent elements or is a relictual flora that has recently dispersed from refugia after the end of the last glacial maximum 1s also unanswered. Because of these unknown factors, the population genetics of
Antarctic mosses are of interest. Examination of the microsatellite variability in
these populations could potentially resolve these questions.
Development of microsatellite markers is a time-consuming and demanding process that requires the screening of a genomic library of bacterial clones. For this process, it is necessary that the DNA used for developing the markers is free of contaminating DNA from other organisms that were extracted at the same time as the DNA from the sample. An example of co-extracted DNA can be found in Hunger (2000), where fungal DNA was found in DNA extracted from Antarctic moss samples. Detection of such contaminants is difficult, but may be performed
by the amplification of specific regions such as the internal transcribed space region (ITS) of nuclear ribosomal DNA producing multiple bands on a gel, or by
random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) amplification of extracted samples,
which are then electrophoresed next to RAPD profiles of known or potential
contaminants and samples that are known not to contain contaminants. A
comparison of the patterns produced should enable identification of those samples
that contain a contaminant
The level of genetic variation in mosses has been found to vary widely between the genera studied and the type of genetic analysis performed. For example, isozyme analyses have reported levels of genetic variation similar to those found in higher plants, while studies ITS have found low levels of genetic variability (Hunger, 2000) and RAPD-PCR has found extreme hyper-variability (Skotnicki et al., 1998a, b, c), admittedly these studies have been performed on different species and genera, however the large variation in results is a reflection of the choice of genetic marker. Levels of genetic diversity have been observed to vary between populations living in stressed habitats, such as Arctic and alpine regions, and those found in temperate climates, this is attributed to the low levels of sexual reproduction occurring in the stressed localities (Montagnes et al., 1993).
Continental Antarctic moss populations have only infrequently been observed to
produce sporophytes, thus there is little evidence for complete sexual reproduction
occurring in this area (Steere, 1965; Horikawa and Ando, 1967; Ochi, 1979; Ochi and Ochyra, 1985; Ochyra, and Ochi, 1986; Seppelt, 1986), also the mosses are highly stressed in these localities (Seppelt and Selkirk, 1984). These findings would indicate that the genetic diversity of Antarctic moss populations is low. RAPD analysis of several moss species from Victoria Land, in the continental Antarctic have found hyper-variability in moss populations (Skotnicki et al.,
1998a, b, c), however, some of this variability could be due to fungal
contamination of the DNA used for these analyses (Hunger 2000).
Microsatellite sequences are a common part of all eukaryote genomes studied so far. They consist of short sequences, 1 — 6 bp in length, which can be repeated many hundreds of times within the genome (Tautz, 1989). Microsatellites exhibit a high degree of length polymorphism due to slippage synthesis events and are codominantly inherited and usually selectively neutral. For these reasons
microsatellites are ideal markers for population genetic studies. The level o microsatellites in mosses has been little studied, but the findings of the studies by
van der Velde et al. (2000, 2001a, b) and van der Velde and Bijlsma (2000, 2001)
were that microsatellites had a low incidence in the genus studied (Polytrichum),
and that the degree of polymorphism in the microsatellites isolated was
particularly low.
Isolation of microsatellite sequences relies on screening of genomes for microsatellite containing sequences, generally through the use of genomic DNA libraries. ‘The number of microsatellites that can be isolated depends on the frequency at which they are found in the organism being studied. Mosses, with a low incidence of microsatellites, are likely to require screening of many thousands of clones to isolate a small number of microsatellite sequences (Zane et al., 2002). As these processes are time-consuming and expensive to set up, it is recommended that a high efficiency protocol such as the Kandpal et al. (1994) selective hybridisation protocol be used to increase the likelihood of isolating
microsatellite sequences.
Difficulties in the development of microsatellites by the majority protocols are likely to be experienced at three key places, these are: 1) ligation of insert DNA into a vector, where determination of the correct ratio of genomic DNA to vector, as estimated from the DNA concentrations in solution, is critical to achieve high levels of insert-containing clones, 2) transformation of the ligated vector into bacterial cells, this can vary according to the method of preparations use and whether the cells have been stored or not, and 3) probing of the clones with oligonucleotide probes to isolate those sequences that contain microsatellites, in this step there are several parts that can lead to spurious results, these include the probe length used in the hybridisation, the hybridisation and wash solutions used (degree of stringency in the wash), hybridisation temperatures and hybridisation times. All of these three steps will variously alter the results obtained and the
efficiency of extraction of the microsatellite sequences.
Future work should focus on isolation of microsatellites from the mosses, and investigating the population genetics of Bryum species within Antarctica using the markers developed. Such a study could potentially elucidate important questions
on the age and adaptability of the native Antarctic moss flora REFERENCES
 
Adam, K. D., Selkirk, P. M., Connett, M. B., Walsh, S. M., 1997. Genetic variation
in populations of the moss Bryum argenteum in East Antarctica. In: Antarctic Communities: Species, Structure and Survival. B. Battaglia, J.
Valencia, D. W. H. Walton (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Akkaya, M. S., Bhagwat, A. A., Cregan, P. B., 1992. Length polymorphisms of simple sequence repeat DNA in soybean. Genetics 132: 1131 — 1139.
Armour, J. A. L., Neumann, R., Gobert, S., Jeffreys, A. J., 1994. Isolation of
human simple repeat loci by hybridisation selection. Human Molecular
Genetics 3: 599 — 605.
Ashley, M. V., Dow, B. D., 1994. The use of microsatellite analysis in population biology: background, methods and potential applications. In: Molecular
Ecology and Evolution: Approaches and Applications. B. Schierwater, B. Streit, G. P. Wagner, R. DeSalle (eds.), Birkhéuser Verlag, Basel,
Switzerland.
Balakrishna, P., 1995. Evaluation of intra-specific variability in Avicennia marina
Forsk. using RAPD markers. Current Science 69: 926 — 929.
Baldwin, G. B., 1992. Phylogeny of the internal transcribed spacers of nuclear
ribosomal DNA in plants: an example from the Compositae. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 1: 3 — 16.
Baldwin, G. B., Sanderson, M. J., Porter, J. M., Wojciechowski, M. F., Campbell, C. S., Donoghue, M. J., 1995. The ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA: a
valuable source of evidence on angiosperm phylogeny. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 82: 247 - 277 Barrett, P. J., 1991. Antarctica and global climatic change: a geological
perspective. In: Antarctica and Global Climatic Change. C. M. Harris, B. Stonehouse (eds.), Belhaven Press, London, United Kingdom.
Barrier, M., Friar, E., Robichaux, R., Purugganan, M., 2000. Interspecific
evolution in plant microsatellite structure. Gene 241: 101 — 105.
Beckler, G., Bahtia, A., Brisco, P., Brondyk, W., Butler, B., DeMars, S., Doers, M., Doyle, K., Goueli, S., Harper, T., Knoche, K., Knuth, M., Lepinske, M., Lesley, S., Marcus, E., Murray, E., Okragly, A., Otto, P., Romanin, D., Romanin, J., Ryan, A., Salatino, R., Schaefer, E., Schenborn, E., Sherf, B., Slater, M., Smith, C., Sobol, M., Stock, C., Storts, D., Sveinsson, D., Tereba, A., 1996. Cloning in plasmid vectors. In: Protocols and
Applications Guide, 3" Edition. K. Dolye (ed.), Promega, Madison, U.S.A.
Beckmann, J. S., Weber, J. L., 1992. Survey of human and rat microsatellites. Genomics 12: 627 - 631.
Bell, C. J., Ecker, J. R., 1994. Assignment of 30 microsatellite loci to the linkage map of Arabidopsis. Genomics 19: 137 — 144.
Black IV, W. C., 1993. PCR with arbitrary primers: approach with care. Insect Molecular Biology 2: | - 6.
Black IV, W. C., 1996. Statistical analysis of arbitrarily primed PCR patterns in molecular taxonomic studies. In: Methods in Molecular Biology, Volume
50: Species Diagnostics Protocols: PCR and Other Nucleic Acid Methods. J. P. Clapp (ed.), Humana Press Inc., Totowa, U.S.A.
Block, W., 1984. Terrestrial microbiology, invertebrates and ecosystems. In:
Antarctic Ecology, Volume 1. R. M. Laws (ed.), Academic Press, London, United Kingdom. ee s«REFEENCES
Bornet, B., Branchard, M., 2001. Nonanchored inter simple sequence repeat
(ISSR) markers: reproducible and specific tools for genome fingerprinting.
Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 19: 209 — 215.
Broady, P., Given, D., Greenfield, L., Thompson, K., 1987. The biota and
environment of fumaroles on Mount Melbourne, northern Victoria Land.
Polar Biology 7: 97 — 113.
Brown, T. A., Ikemura, T., McClelland M., Roberts, R. J., 1991. Molecular
Biology Labfax. T. A. Brown (ed.), BIOS Scientific Publishers Limited, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Bruford, M. W., Wayne, R. K., 1993. Microsatellites and their application to
population genetic studies. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development
3: 1-4.
Bull, C., 1966. Climatological observations in ice-free areas of southern Victoria
Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Research Series 9: 177 — 194.
Campbell, I. B., Claridge, G. G. C., 2000. Soil temperature, moisture and salinity patterns in Transantarctic Mountain cold desert ecosystems. In: Antarctic Ecosystems: Models for Wider Ecological Understanding. W. Davison, C. Howard-Williams, P. Broady (eds.), Canterbury University, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Cardot, J., 1908. La flore bryologique des Terres Magellaniques, de la Géorgie du Sud et de |’Antarctide. Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der Schwedischen Siidpolarexpedition 1901-03, 4: 1 - 298.
Castello, M., Nimis, P. L., 1997. Diversity of lichens in Antarctica. In: Antarctic Communities: Species, Structure and Survival. B. Battaglia, J. Valencia, D. W. H. Walton (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom Catcheside, D. G., 1980. Mosses of South Australia. In: Handbook of the Flora and Fauna of South Australia. Issued by the Handbooks Committee on
behalf of the South Australian Government. D. J. Woolman, Government
Printer, South Australia, Australia.
Chung, C. T., Niemela, S. L., Miller, R. H., 1989. One-step preparation of
competent Escherichia coli: transformation and storage of bacterial cells in
the same solution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 86: 2172 - 2175.
Clark, A. G., Lanigan, C. M. S., 1993. Prospects for estimating nucleotide
divergence with RAPDs. Molecular Biology and Evolution 10: 1096 — 1111.
Clarke, G. C. S., Greene, S. W., 1970a. Reproductive performance of two species
of Pohlia at widely separated stations. Transactions of the British
Bryological Society 6: 114 — 128.
Clarke, G. C. S., Greene, S. W., 1970b. Reproductive performance of two species of Pohlia from temperate and sub-Antarctic stations under controlled
environmental conditions. Transactions of the British Bryological Society
6: 278 — 295.
Condit, R., Hubbell, S. P., 1991. Abundance and DNA sequence of two-base repeat
regions in tropical tree genomes. Genome 34: 66 — 71.
Convey, P., 1997. Comparative studies of Antarctic arthropod and bryophyte life cycles: do they have a common strategy? In: Antarctic Communities: Species, Structure and Survival. B. Battaglia, J. Valencia, D. W. H. Walton (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Cox, C. J., 1998. Phylogenetic relationships of the Eubryalean mosses (Bryineae, Musci). PhD Thesis. University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom. Craddock, C., 1977. Antarctica and Gondwanaland. In: Antarctic Geoscience. C.
Craddock (ed.), University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, U.S.A.
Dahl, E., 1946. On different types of unglaciated areas during the Ice Ages and their significance to phytogeography. New Phytologist 45: 225 — 242.
Daniels, R. E., 1993. Phenotypic and genotypic variation in Sphagnum. Advances in Bryology 5: 31 — 60.
Dayanandan, S., Bawa, K. S., Kesseli, R., 1997. Conservation of microsatellites
among tropical trees (Leguminosae). American Journal of Botany 84: 1658 — 1663.
Dellaporta, S. L., Wood, J., Hicks, J. B., 1983. A plant DNA minipreparation: version II. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 1: 19 — 21.
Du Toit, A. L., 1937. Our Wandering Continents, an Hypothesis of Continental Drifting. Hafner Publishing Company, New York, U.S.A.
Ellegren, H., 2000. Microsatellite mutations in the germline: implications for
evolutionary inference. Trends in Genetics 16: 551 — 558.
Ellegren, H., Primmer, C. R., Sheldon, B. C., 1995. Microsatellite ‘evolution’:
directionality or bias? Nature Genetics 11: 360 - 362.
Elliot, D. H., 1985. Physical geography- geological evolution. In: Key
Environments: Antarctica. W.N. Bonner, D. W. H. Walton (eds.),
Pergamon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Ellsworth, D. L., Rittenhouse, K. D., Honeycutt, R. L., 1993. Artifactual variation in randomly amplified polymorphic DNA banding patterns. Biotechnique Ender, A., Schwenk, K., Stadler, T., Streit, B., Schierwater, B., 1996. RAPD
identification of microsatellites in Daphnia. Molecular Ecology 5: 437 441.
Gaggiotti, O. E., Lange, O., Rassmann, K., Gliddons, C., 1999. A comparison of
two indirect methods for estimating average levels of gene flow using
microsatellite data. Molecular Ecology 8: 1513 — 1520.
Goldstein, D. B., Pollock, D. D., 1998. Launching microsatellites: A review of
mutation processes and methods of phylogenetic inference. Journal of Heredity 88: 335 — 342.
Greene, S. W., 1962. Problems and progress in Antarctic bryology. In: Biologie Antarctique. R. Carrick, M. Holdgate, J. Prévost (eds.), Hermann, Paris,
France.
Grosberg, R. K., Levitan, D. R., Cameron, B. B., 1996. Characterisation of genetic structure and genealogies using RAPD-PCR markers: a random primer for
the novice and nervous. In: Molecular Zoology: Advances, Strategies and Protocols. J. D. Ferraris, S. R. Palumbi (eds.), Wiley-Liss Inc., New York, U.S.A.
Gupta, P. K., Balyan, H. S., Sharma, P. C., Ramesh, B., 1996. Microsatellites in
plants: A new class of molecular markers. Current Science 70: 45 — 54.
Gupta, M., Chyi, Y.-S., Romero-Severson, J., Owen, J. L., 1994. Amplification of DNA markers from evolutionarily diverse genomes using single primers of
simple sequence repeats. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 89: 998 — 1006.
Gurnis, M., 1988. Large-scale mantle convection and the aggregation and dispersal
of supercontinents. Nature 332: 695 — 699.
Hadrys, H., Balick, M., Schierwater, B., 1992. Applications of random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) in molecular ecology. Molecular Ecology 1: 55
— 63 Hambrey, M. J., Larsen, B., Ehrmann, W. U., ODP Leg 119 Shipboard Party, 1989.
Forty million years of Antarctic glacial history yielded by Leg 119 of the Ocean Drilling Program. Polar Record 25: 99 — 106.
Hamby, R. K., Zimmer, E. A., 1992. Ribosomal RNA as a phylogenetic tool in
plant systematics. In: Molecular Systematics of Plants. P. S. Soltis, D. E. Soltis, J. J. Doyle (eds.), Chapman Hall, New York, U.S.A.
Hanahan, D., 1985. Techniques for transformation of E. coli. In: DNA Cloning- A
Practical Approach Volume 1. D. M. Glover, (ed.), IRL Press Ltd., Oxford, United Kingdom.
Hansom, J. D., Gordon, J. E., 1998. Antarctic Environments and Resources, a
Geographical Persepective. Addison Wesley Longman Ltd., New York, U.S.A.
Hillis, D. M., Mable, B. K., Larson, A., Davis, S. K., Zimmer, E. A., 1996. Nucleic acids IV: sequencing and cloning. In: Molecular Systematics 2" Edition.
D. M. Hillis, C. Moritz, B. K., Mable (eds.), Sinauer Associates Inc., Sunderland, U.S.A.
Holdgate, M. W., 1967. Signy Island. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, series B, Biological Sciences 252: 173 — 177.
Holmes, A., 1965. Principles of Physical Geography. Thomas Nelson Litd., London, United Kingdom.
Horikawa, Y., Ando, H., 1960. Mosses of the Ongul Islands collected during the 1957 - 1960 Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition. Hikobia 2: 160 - 178.
Horikawa, Y., Ando, H., 1967. The mosses of Ongul Islands and adjoining coastal
areas of the Antarctic continent. Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
Scientific Reports, Special Issues 1: 245 — 252 Hunger, S. A., 2000. A study on molecular systematics of the Antarctic Bryum species and the development of microsatellite DNA markers in Bryum
argenteum Hedw. MSc Thesis. University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand.
Jarne, P., Lagoda, P. J. L., 1996. Microsatellites, from molecules to populations
and back. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 11: 424 — 429.
Jones, C. J., Edwards, K. J., Castaglione, S., Winfield, M. O., Sala, F., van de Wiel, C., Bredemeijer, G., Vosman, B., Matthes, M., Daly, A., Brettschneider, R., Bettini, P., Buiatti, M., Maestri, E., Malcevschi, A., Marmiroli, N., Aert, R., Volckaert, G., Rueda, J., Linacero, R., Vazquez, A., Karp, A., 1997. Reproducibility testing of RADP, AFLP and SSR markers in plants by a
network of European laboratories. Molecular Breeding 3: 381 — 390.
Kanda,H., 1987. New localities and taxonomic remarks for some mosses in continental Antarctica. Proceedings of the National Institute for Polar
Research Symposium on Polar Biology 1: 265 - 272.
Kanda, H., 1981. Two moss species of the genus Pottia collected from the vicinity
of Syowa Station, East Antarctica. Antarctic Record 71: 96 - 108.
Kandpal, R. P., Kandpal, G., Weissman, S. M., 1994. Construction of libraries enriched for sequence repeats and jumping clones, and hybridisation
selection of region-specific markers. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 91: 88 — 92.
Karhu, A., Dieterich, J.-H., Savolainen, O., 2000. Rapid expansion of
microsatellite sequences in pines. Molecular Biology and Evolution 17: 259
- 265.
Kennedy, A. D., 1993. Water as a limiting factor in the Antarctic terrestrial
environment: a biogeographical synthesis. Arctic Alpine Research 25: 308
— 315 Kruglyak, S., Durrett, R. T., Schug, M. D., Aquadro, C. F., 1998. Equilibrium
 
distributions of microsatellite repeat length resulting from a balance between slippage events and point mutations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95: 10774 — 10778.
Lagercrantz, U., Ellegren, H., Andersson, L., 1993. The abundance of various
polymorphic microsatellite motifs differs between plants and vertebrates.
Nucleic Acids Research 21: 1111-1115.
Lamb, I. M., 1970. Antarctic terrestrial plants and their ecology. In: Antarctic
Ecology, Volume 2. M. W. Holdgate (ed.), Academic Press, London, United Kingdom.
Levinson, G., Gutman, G. A., 1987. Slipped-strand mispairing: a major mechanism
for DNA sequence evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution 4: 203 221.
Lewis-Smith, R. I., 1984. Terrestrial plant biology of the sub-Antarctic and
Antarctic. In: Antarctic Ecology, Volume 1. R. M. Laws (ed.), Academic Press, London, United Kingdom.
Lewis-Smith, R. I., 1997. Oases as centres of high plant diversity and dispersal in Antarctica. In: Ecosystem Processes in Antarctic Ice-Free Landscapes. W. B. Lyons, C. Howard-Williams, I. Hawes (eds.), A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Litt, M., Luty, J. A., 1989. A hypervariable microsatellite revealed by in vitro amplification of a dinucleotide repeat within the cardiac muscle actin gene.
American Journal of Human Genetics 44: 397 - 401.
Linskens, H. F., Bargagli, B., Cresti, M., Focardi, S., 1993. Entrapment of long distance transported pollen grains by various moss species in coastal
Victoria Land, Antarctica. Systematic Botany 21: 109 — 121. Llano, G. A., 1965. The flora of Antarctica. In: Antarctica. T. Hatherton (ed.), A. H. and A. W. Reed, Wellington, New Zealand
Li, Q.-B., Cai, Q., Guy, C. L., 1994. A DNA extraction method for RAPD analysis
from plants rich in soluble polysaccharides. Plant Molecular Biology
Reporter 12: 215 — 220.
Longton, R. E., 1973. The occurrence of radial infection patterns in colonies of
polar bryophytes. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 32: 41 — 49.
Longton, R. E., 1976. Reproductive biology and evolutionary potential in bryophytes. Journal of the Hattori Botanical Laboratory 41: 205 — 223.
Longton, R. E., 1985. Terrestrial habitats - Vegetation. In: Key Environments
Series: Antarctica. W.N. Bonner, D. W. H. Walton (eds.), Pergamon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Longton, R. E., Greene, S. W., 1967. The growth and reproduction of Polytrichum
alpestre Hoppe on South Georgia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, series B, Biological Sciences 252: 295 — 322.
Marshall, W. A., 1996. Biological particles over Antarctica. Nature 383: 680.
Marshall, W. A., Convey, P., 1997. Dispersal of propagules on Signy Island, maritime Antarctic. Polar Biology 18: 376 — 383.
Matioli, S.R., de Brito, R. A., 1995. Obtaining genetic markers by using
double-stringency PCR with microsatellites and arbitrary primers.
Biotechniques 19: 752 — 758.
McCouch, S. R., Chen, X., Panaud, O., Temnykh, S., Xu, Y., Gu Cho, Y., Huang, N., Ishii, T., Blair, M., 1997. Microsatellite marker development, mapping
and applications in rice genetics and breeding. Plant Molecular Biology 35 Melick, D. R., Seppelt. R. D., 1997. Vegetation patterns in relation to climate and
endogenous changes in Wilkes Land, continental Antarctica. Journal of
Ecology 85: 43 — 56.
Meunier, J.-R., Grimont, P. A. D., 1993. Factors affecting reproducibility of
random amplified polymorphic DNA fingerprinting. Research in Microbiology 144: 373 — 379.
Montagnes, R. J. S., Bayer, R. J., Vitt, D. H., 1993. Isozyme variation in the moss
Messia triquetra (Messiaceae. Journal of the Hattori Botanical Laboratory 74: 155 — 170.
Morgante, M., Olivieri A. M., 1993. PCR — amplified microsatellites as markers in plant genetics. The Plant Journal 3: 175 — 182.
Murray, H. G., Thompson, W. F., 1980. Rapid isolation of high molecular weight DNA. Nucleic Acids Research 8: 4321 — 4325.
Nakamura, Y., Leppert, M., O’Connell, P., Wolff, R., Holm, T., Culver, M., Matrin, C., Fujimoto, E., Hoff, M., Kumlin, E., White, R., 1987. Variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) markers for human genome mapping.
Science 235: 1616 — 1622.
Nishimura, A., Morita, M., Nishimura, Y., Sugino, Y., 1990. A rapid and highly efficient method for preparation of competent Escherichia coli cells.
Nucleic Acids Research. 18: 6169.
Nybom, H., Ramser, J., Kaemmer, D., Kahl, G., Weising, K., 1992. Oligonucleotide DNA fingerprinting detects a multiallelic locus in box
elder (Acer negundo). Molecular Ecology 1: 65 — 67. Ochi, H., 1979. A taxonomic review of the genus Bryum, Musci in Antarctica. In:
Proceedings of the Symposium on Terrestrial Ecosystems in the Syowa
Station Area — Memoirs of the National Institute of Polar Research, Specia Issue No. 11. T. Matsuda, T. Hoshiai (eds.), National Institute of Polar Research, Tokyo, Japan.
Ochi, H., 1992. A revised infrageneric classification of the genus Bryum and
related genera (Bryaceae, Musci). Bryobrothera 1: 231 - 244.
Ochi, H., Kanda, H., 1991. New additions of Bryaceous mosses (Musci, Bryaceae) to the Antarctic flora. Proceedings of the National Institute for Polar
Research Symposium on Polar Biology 4:123 - 126.
Ochi, H., Ochyra, R., 1985. Bryum dichotomum Hedw., a species new to the Antarctic. Lindbergia 11: 157 - 160.
Ochyra, R., Ochi, H., 1986. New or otherwise interesting species of the genus
Bryum (Musci, Bryaceae) in the Antarctic. Acta Botanica Hungarica 32: 209 - 219.
Orti, G., Pearse, D. E., Avise, J. C., 1997. Phylogenetic assessment of length
variation at a microsatellite locus. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 94: 10745 — 10749.
Ostrander, E. A., Jong, P. M., Rine, J., Duyk, G., 1992. construction of small-insert genomic libraries highly enriched for microsatellite repeat sequences.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 89: 3149 — 3424.
Porebski, S., Bailey, L. G., Baum, B. R., 1997. Modification of a CTAB DNA extraction protocol for plants containing high polysaccharide and
polyphenol components. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 15: 8 — 15.
Primmer, C. R., Ellegren, H., Saino, N., Mgller, A. P., 1996. Directional evolution
in germline microsatellite mutations. Nature Genetics 13: 391 — 393. Ramser, J., Weising, K., Chikaleke, V., Kahl, G., 1997a. Increased informativeness
of RAPD analysis by detection of microsatellite motifs. Biotechniques 23: 285 - 290.
Ramser, J., Weising, K., Lopez-Peralta, C., Terhalle, W., Terauchi, R., Kahl, G., 1997b. Molecular marker based taxonomy and phylogeny of Guinea yam
(Dioscorea rotundata — D. cayenensis). Genome 40: 903 — 915.
Robin, G. de Q., 1988. The Antarctic ice sheet, its history and response to sea level and climatic changes over the past 100 million years. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 67: 31 — 50.
Rogers, S. O., Bendich, A. J., 1985. Extraction of DNA from milligram amounts of
fresh, herbarium and mummified plant tissues. Plant Molecular Biology 5: 69 — 76.
Rosenbaum, H. C., Deinard, A. S., 1998. Caution before claim: an overview of microsatellite analysis in ecology and evolutionary biology. In: Molecular Approaches to Ecology and Evolution. R. DeSalle, B. Schierwater (eds.),
Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland.
Rossetto, M., Harriss, F. C. L., Mclauchlan, A., Henry, R. J., Baverstock, P. R.., Lee, L. S., 2000. Interspecific amplification of tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia — Myrtaceae) microsatellite loci - potential implications for
conservation studies. Australian Journal of Botany 48: 367 — 373. Rychlik, P., Rychlik, W., 2002. Oligo, Version 6.61. Molecular Biology Insights.
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., Maniatis, T., 1989. Molecular Cloning, A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, U.S.A.
Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., Coulson, A. R., 1977. DNA sequencing with chain
terminating inhibitors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 74: 5463 — 5467 Saunders, G. C., Dukes, J., Parkes, H. C., Cornett, J. H., 2001. Interlaboratory
study on thermal cycler performance in controlled PCR and random
amplified polymorphic DNA analyses. Clinical Chemistry 47: 47 — 55.
Schlotterer, C., Amos, W., Tautz, D., 1991. Conservation of simples sequence loci
in cetacean species. Nature 354: 63 - 65.
Schlotterer, C., Pemberton, J., 1994. The use of microsatellites for genetic analysis
of natural populations. In: Molecular Ecology and Evolution: Approaches
and Applications. B. Schierwater, B. Streit, G. P. Wagner, R. DeSalle
(eds.), Birkhduser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland.
Schlotterer, C., Pemberton, J., 1998. The use of microsatellites for genetic analysis of natural populations — a critical review. In: Molecular Approaches to
Ecology and Evolution. R. DeSalle, B. Schierwater (eds.), Birkhauser
Verlag, Basel, Switzerland.
Schlétterer, C., Tautz, D., 1992. Slippage synthesis of simple sequence DNA. Nucleic Acids Research 20: 211 — 215.
Seppelt, R. D., 1986. Bryophytes of the Vestfold Hills. In: Antarctic Oasis, Terrestrial Environments and History of the Vestfold Hills. J. Pickard (ed.),
Academic Press, Australia.
Seppelt, R. D., Green, T. G. A., 1998. A bryophyte flora for southern Victoria Land, Antarctica. New Zealand Journal of Botany 36: 617 - 635.
Seppelt, R. D., Selkirk, P. M., 1984. Effects of submersion on morphology and the implications of induced environmental modification on the taxonomic
interpretation of selected Antarctic moss species. Journal of the Hattori
Botanical Laboratory 55: 273 — 279.
Shackelton, N. J., Kennett, P. J., 1975. Paleotemperature history of the Cenozoic
and the initiation of Antarctic glaciation: oxygen and carbon isotop analyses in DSDP sites 277, 279 and 281. In: Initial Reports of the Deep Sea Drilling Project. P. J. Kennett, R. Houtz (eds.) 29: 743 — 755.
Shaw, A. J., 1991. Ecological genetics, evolutionary constraints and the
systematics of Bryophytes. Advances in Bryology 4: 29 — 74.
Sibly, R. M., Whittaker, J. C., Talbot, M., 2001. A maximum-likelihood approach
to fitting equilibrium models of microsatellite evolution. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 18: 413 - 417.
Skotnicki, M. L., Selkirk, P. M., Dale, T. M., 1997. RAPD profiling of genetic variation in Antarctic mosses. In: Ecosystem Processes in Antarctic
Ice-Free Landscapes. W. B. Lyons, C. Howard-Williams, I. Hawes (eds.) A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Skotnicki, M. L., Ninham, J. A., Selkirk, P. M., 1998a. High levels of RAPD diversity in the moss Bryum argenteum in Australia, New Zealand and
Antarctica. The Bryologist 101: 412 — 421.
Skotnicki, M. L., Selkirk, P. M., Beard, C., 1998b. RAPD profiling of genetic diversity in two populations of the moss Ceratodon purpureus in Victoria
Land, Antarctica. Polar Biology 19: 172 — 176.
Skotnicki, M. L., Selkirk, P. M., Ninham, J. A., 1998c. RAPD analysis of genetic variation and dispersal of the moss Bryum pseudotriquetrum from southern
Victoria Land, Antarctica. Polar Biology 20: 121 — 126.
Slatkin, M., 1995. A measure of population subdivision based on microsatellite
allele frequencies. Genetics 139: 457 — 462.
Steere, W. C., 1961. A preliminary review of the bryophytes of Antarctica. In: Science in Antarctica, Part 1. The Life Science of Antarctica. National
Academy of Science, National Research Council. Publication 839: 20 — 33, Washington, U.S.A sé TENCOCS
Steere, W. C., 1965. Antarctic Bryophyta. BioScience 283-285.
Stoneburner, A., Wyatt, R., Odrzykoski, I. J., 1991. Applications of enzyme
electrophoresis to bryophyte systematics and population biology. Advances
in Bryology 4: 1 — 28.
Strassmann, J. E., Solis, C. R., Peters, J. M., Queller, D. C., 1996. Strategies for finding and using highly polymorphic DNA microsatellite loci for studies of
genetic relatedness and pedigrees. In: Molecular Zoology: Advances,
Strategies and Protocols. J. D. Ferraris, S. R. Palumbi (eds.), Wiley — Liss Inc., New York, U.S. A.
Swofford, D. L., 1998. PAUP* Version 4.0b2a: Phylogenetic Analysis using Parsimony (* And Other Methods). Sinauer Associates Inc., Sunderland,
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
Takezaki, N., Nei, M., 1996. Genetic distances and reconstruction of phylogenetic
trees from microsatellite DNA. Genetics 144: 389 — 399.
Tautz, D., 1989. Hypervariability of simple sequence repeats as a general source
for polymorphic DNA markers. Nucleic Acids Research 17: 6463 - 6471.
Tautz, D., 1993. Notes on the definition and nomenclature of tandemly repetitive
DNA sequences. In: DNA Fingerprinting: State of the Science. S. D. J. Pena, R. Chakraborty, J. T. Epplen, A. J. Jeffreys (eds.), Birkhauser Verlag,
Basel, Switzerland.
Tautz, D., Renz, M., 1984. Simple sequence repeats are ubiquitous repetitive
components of eukaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Research 12: 4127 —
4138.
Ugolini, F. C., 1970. Antarctic soils and their ecology. In: Antarctic Ecology, Volume 2. M. W. Holdgate (ed.), Academic Press, London, United Kingdom. Valentine, J. W., Moores, E. M., 1970. Plate-tectonic regulation of faunal diversity
and sea level: a model. Nature 228: 657 — 659.
van der Velde, M., Bijlsma, R., 2000. Amount and structure of intra- and
interspecific genetic variation in the moss genus Polytrichum. Heredity 85:
328 - 337.
van der Velde, M., Bijlsma, R., 2001. Genetic evidence for the allodiploid origin of the moss species Polytrichum longisetum. Plant Biology 3: 379 — 385.
van der Velde, M., During, H. J., van de Zande, L., Bijlsma, R., 2001a. The reproductive biology of Polytrichum formosum: clonal structure and
paternity revealed by microsatellites. Molecular Ecology 10: 2423 — 2434.
van der Velde, M., van der Strate, H. J.. van de Zande, L., Bijlsma, R., 2000. Isolation and characterisation of microsatellites in the moss species
Polytrichum formosum. Molecular Ecology 9: 1678 — 1680.
van der Velde, M., van de Zande, L., Bijlsma, R., 2001b. Genetic structure of Polytrichum formosum in relation to the breeding system as revealed by
microsatellites. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 14: 288 — 295.
Van Treuren, R., Kuittinen, H., Karkkainen, K., Baena-Gonzalez, E., Savolainen, O., 1997. Evolution of microsatellites in Arabis petraea and Arabis lyrata,
outcrossing relatives of Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 14: 220 — 229.
Vincent, W. F., 1997. Polar desert ecosystems in a changing climate: a
North-South perspective. In: Ecosystem Processes in Antarctic Ice-Free Landscapes. W. B. Lyons, C. Howard-Williams, I. Hawes (eds.), A. A.
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Wallace, R. B., Shaffer, J., Murphy, R. F., Bonner, J., Hirose, T., Itakura, K., 1979. Hybridization of synthetic oligodeox yribonucleotides to phi chi 174 DNA the effect of single base pair mismatch. Nucleic Acids Research 6: 3543 3557
Walton, D. W. H., 1984. The terrestrial environment. In: Antarctic Ecology, Volume I. R. M. Laws (ed.), Academic Press, London United Kingdon.
Walton, D. W. H., Morris, E. M., 1990. Science, environment and resources in
Antarctica. Applied Geography 10: 265 — 286.
Wang, Z., Weber, J. L., Zhong, G., Tanksley, S. D., 1994. Survey of plant short tandem DNA repeats. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 88: 1 — 6.
Watson, E. V., 1968. British Mosses and Liverworts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Weber, J. L., 1990. Informativeness of human (dC-dA), (dG-dT), polymorphisms. Genomics 7: 524 — §30.
Weber, J. L., May, P.E., 1989. Abundant class of human DNA polymorphisms, which can be typed using the polymerase chain reaction. American Journal
of Human Genetics 44: 388 — 396.
Weber, J. L., Wong, C., 1993. Mutation of human short tandem repeats. Human Molecular Genetics 2: 1123 - 1128.
Wegener, A., 1924. Die Entstehung der Kontinente und Ozeane (The Origin of Continents and Oceans: translated from the 3 German ed. by J. G. A.
Skerl). Methuen, London, United Kingdom.
Weising, K., Atkinson, R. G., Gardner, R. C., 1995. Genomic fingerprinting by microsatellite-primed PCR: a critical evaluation. PCR Methods and
Applications 4: 249 - 255.
White, T. J., Bruns, T., Lee, S., Taylor, J.. 1990. Amplification and direct sequencing of fungal ribosomal RNA genes for phylogenetics. In: PC eee ssisisCSCsCéR FOTENCES
Protocols: A Guide to Methods and Applications. M. Innis, D. Gelfand, J. Sinisky, T. White (eds.), Academic Press, San Diego U.S.A.
Williams, J. G. K., Kubelik, A. R., Livak, K. J., Rafalski, J. A., Tingey, S. V., 1990.
DNA polymorphisms amplified by arbitrary primers are useful as genetic
markers. Nucleic Acids Research 18: 6531 - 6535.
Wise, K. A. J., Gressitt, J. L., 1965. Far southern animals and plants. Nature 207: 101 - 102.
Wyatt, R., Derda, G. S., 1997. Population biology of the Polytrichaceae. Advances in Bryology 6: 265 — 296.
Zane, L., Bargelloni, L., Patarnello, T., 2002. Strategies for microsatellite
isolation: areview. Molecular Ecology 11:1 - 16. Web Site :
Felsenstein, J. 1993. PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.5. Distributed by the author. Department of Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, U.S.A.
(http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html). | Extracted from website, March 2000.
Glenn, T. C. 2001. Microsatellite Manual, Version 7.0.1. Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, USA.
(http://www.uga.edu/srel/DNA_ Lab). Extracted from website, March 2001.
Schnieder, S., Roessli, D, Excoffier, L., 2000. Arlequin Version 2.000. A software for population genetic analysis. Genetics and Biometry Laboratory, Department of Anthropology and Ecology, University of Geneva,
Switzerland.
(http://anthro.unige.ch/arlequin) extracted from website March 2000 Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
ID
RH 1/1 HH RH 1/2 HH RH 1/3 HH RH 1/4 HH RH 1/5 BS
RH 2/1 BS RH 2/2 HH RH 2/3 HH
RH 3/1 HH
RH 3/2 HH RH 3/3 HH
RH 3/4 HH RH 3/5 HH RH 3/6 HH RH 3/7 HH
RH 3/8 HH RH 3/9 HH
RH 3/10 HH
RH 3/11 HH RH 3/12 HH
RH 3/13 HH
RH 3/14 HH
RH 3/15 HH RH 4/1 HH
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
105
Date
25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Hennidiella heimit Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
RH 4/2 HH RH 4/3 HH RH 4/4 HH
RH 5/1 BS RH 6/1 HH RH 6/2 HH RH 6/3 HH RH 6/4 HH RH 6/5 HH RH 6/6 HH
RH 7/1 BS RH 8/1 BS
RH 8/2 BS
RH 8/3 BS RH 8/4 BS
RH 8/5 BS
RH 8/6 BS RH 8/7 BS RH 8/8 BS
RH 9/1 HH
RH 9/2 HH RH 9/3 HH
RH 10/1 BS RH 10/2 BS
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
106
Date
25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Hennidiella heimit Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID RH 11/1 HH
RH 12/1 HH
RH 12/2 HH RH 12/3 HH
RH 12/4 HH
RH 13/1A BS RH 13/1B BS
RH 13/2 BS
RH 13/3 BS RH 14/1 BS
RH 14/2 BS
RH 14/3 BS RH 15/1 BS RH 15/2 BS RH 15/3 BS RH 15/4 BS RH 15/5 BS RH 15/6 BS
RH 15/7 BS RH 15/8 BS
RH 15/9 BS
RH 15/10 BS RH 15/11 BS
RH 15/12 BS
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
107
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
ID
RH 15/13 BS RH 16/1 BS RH 17/1 BS RH 17/2 BS RH 17/3 BS RH 17/4 BS RH 17/5 BS RH 18/1A BS RH 18/1B BS
RH 18/2A BS
RH 18/2B BS RH 18/3A BS
RH 18/3B BS
RH 18/4 BS RH 18/5 BS
RH 18/6 BS
RH 19/1 BP RH 19/2 BP RH 19/3 BP
RH 19/4 BP RH 19/5 BP
RH 19/6 BP
RH 19/7 BP RH 19/8 BP
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
108
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum
ID RH 19/9 BP
RH 19/10 BP RH 19/11 BP RH 19/12 BP
RH 19/13 BP RH 19/14 BP RH 19/15 BP RH 19/16 BP
RH 19/17 BP RH 19/18 BP
RH 19/19 BP
RH 19/20 BP RH 19/21 BP
RH 19/22 BP
RH 19/23 BP RH 19/24 BP
RH 19/25 BP
RH 19/26 BP RH 19/27 BP RH 19/28 BP
RH 19/29 BP RH 19/30 BP RH 19/31 BP
RH 19/32 BP
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
109
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID RH 19/33 BP RH 19/34 BP
RH 19/35 BP
RH 19/36 BP RH 20/1 BS
RH 20/2 BS RH 20/3 BS RH 20/4 BS RH 20/5 BS
RH 20/6 BS RH 20/7 BS
RH 20/8 BS RH 20/9 BS RH 20/10 BS RH 21/1 BS RH 22/1 HH
RH 22/2 HH RH 22/3 HH
RH 22/4 HH
RH 22/5 HH RH 22/6 HH
RH 22/7 HH
RH 23/1 BS RH 23/2 BS
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
110
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
RH 23/3 BS
RH 23/4 BS RH 23/5 BS
RH 23/6 BS
RH 23/7 BS RH 23/8 BS
RH 23/9 BS
RH 23/10 BS RH 23/11 BS RH 23/12 BS
RH 23/13 BS RH 23/14 BS
RH 23/15 BS
RH 24/1 BP
RH 24/2 BP RH 24/3 BP
RH 25/1 BS
RH 25/2 BS RH 25/3 BS
RH 25/4 BS
RH 25/5 BS RH 25/6 BS
RH 25/7 BS RH 25/8 BS
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
111
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID RH 25/9 BS
RH 25/10 BS
RH 25/11 BS RH 25/12 BS
RH 25/13 BS
RH 26/1 BS RH 27/1 BP RH 28/1 HH STAI BS STA2BS ST A3 BS STA4BS
STAS5BS STA6BS
ST A7 BS STA8 BS STA9BS ST A 10 BS
STA11 BS ST A 12 BS STA 13 BS STA 14BS
STA 15 BS STA 16 BS
Source Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
112
Date
26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 26-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00
Locality Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimit Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
STA 17 BS ST A 18 BS STA 19 BS ST A 20 BS
BI HH BIIA BS
BIIC BS
BI A1 BS BI A2 BS
BI A3 BS
BI A4 BS BI A5 BS
BI A6 BS
BI A7 BS BIB1 BS
BI B2 BS
BI B3 BS BI B4 BS BI BS BS
BI B6 BS
BI B7 BS BIC1 BS
BIC2 BS BI C3 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Wild Wild:
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
113
Date
25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 25-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00
Locality
Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica Cape Bird, Antarctica
Cape Bird, Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID BI C4 BS
BIC5 BS BIC6BS BI C7 BS BID1 BS
BI D2 BS BI D3 BS
BI D4 Bs
BID5 BS BI D6 BS
BI D7 BS
BIEI BS BIE2 BS BI E3 BS BI E4 BS BIES BS BIE6 BS BIE7 BS
BIF1 BS BI F2 BS
BI F3 BS BI F4 BS BI F5 BS BI F6 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort [sland
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
114
Date
27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00
Locality Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
BI F7 BS BIG1 BS BI G2 BS BI G3 BS BI G4 BS BIG5 BS BI G6 BS BI G7 BS BILT 1 BS BILT 2 BS
BILT 3 BS BILT 4 BS
BILT 5 BS
BILT 6 BS BILT 7 BS
BILT 8 BS
BILT 9 BS BILT 10 BS
BILT 11 BS
BILT 12 BS BILT 13 BS
BILT 14 BS
BILT 15 BS BILT 16 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
115
Date
27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-O0 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00
Locality
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
BILT 17 BS BILT 18 BS BILT 19 BS BILT 20 BS BILT 21 BS
BILT 22 BS BILT 23 BS
BRC IA BS
BI2C IB BS BI2C IC BS
BI2C ID BS
BI2C 1EBS BI2C 2A BS
BI2C 2B BS
BI2C 2C BS BI2C 2D BS
BI2C 2E BS
BI2C 3A BS BI2C 3B BS
BI2C 3C BS
BI2C 3D BS BI2C 3E BS BI2C 4A BS
BI2C 4B BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island
116
Date
27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-O0 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-O0 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00
Locality
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti
ID
BI2C 4C BS BI2C 4D BS BI2C 4E BS BI2C 5A BS BI2C 5B BS
BIC 5C BS BI2C 5D BS BI2C 5E BS MV 1/1 HH
MV 1/2 HH MV 1/3 HH
MV 1/4 HH
MV 1/5 HH MV 1/6 HH
MV 1/7 HH MV 1/8 HH MV 1/9 HH MV 1/10 HH MV 1/11 HH
MV 1/12 HH MV 1/13 HH
MV 1/14 HH
MV 1/15 HH MV 2/1 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
Beaufort Island Beaufort Island Beaufort Island
117
Date
27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-O0 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 2/-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 27-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00
Locality
Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica Antarctica
Antarctica Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimit
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Hennidiella heimii Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID MV 2/2 BS
MV 2/3 BS MV 2/4 BS
MV 2/5 BS
MV 3/1 HH MV 3/2 HH MV 3/3 HH
MV 3/4 HH MV 3/5 HH
MV 4/1 BS
MV 5/1 HH MV 6/1 HH
MV 7/1 BP MV 7/2 BP
MV 7/3 BP MV 7/4 BP
MV 7/5 BP
MV 8/1 HH MV 9/1 BP
MV 10/1BS
MV 11/1 BS MV 13/1 BS
MV 13/2 BS MV 13/3 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
118
Date
30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 30-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID MV 13/4 BS
MV 13/5 BS MV 13/6 BS MV 13/7 BS MV 13/8 BS
MV 13/9 BS MV 13/10 BS
MV 13/11 BS
MV 13/12 BS MV 13/13 BS
MV 13/14 BS MV 13/15 BS
MV 13/16 BS MV 13/17 BS
MV 13/18 BS MV 13/19 BS MV 13/20 BS MV 13/21 BS MV 13/22 BS MV 13/23 BS MV 13/24 BS MV 13/25 BS MV 13/26 BS MV 13/27 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix |
119
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
MV 13/28 BS MV 13/29 BS MV 13/30 BS
MV 13/31 BS
MV 13/32 BS MV 13/33 BS
MV 13/34 BS MV 13/35 BS MV 13/36 BS MV 13/37 BS MV 13/38 BS MV 13/39 BS MV 13/40 BS
MV 13/41 BS MV 13/42 BS
MV 13/43 BS MV 13/44 BS
MV 13/45 BS MV 13/46 BS
MV 13/47 BS MV 13/48 BS MV 13/49 BS MV 13/50 BS MV 13/51 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix |
120
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
ID
MV 13/52 BS MV 13/53 BS MV 13/54 BS MV 13/55 BS MV 13/56 BS
MV 14/1 HH MV 15/1 HH
MV 16/1 HH
MV 17/1 HH MV 18/1 HH
MG 1/1 HH
MG 2/1 HH MG 3/1 HH
MG 4/1 HH MG 5/1 HH MG 6/1 HH MG 7/1 HH MG 8/1 HH
MG 9/1 HH MG 9/2 HH
MG 9/3 HH
MG 9/4 HH MG 9/5 HH
MG 9/6 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix |
121
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimit Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
ID MG 9/7 HH MG 9/8 HH
MG 9/9 HH
MG 9/10 HH MG 9/11 HH
MG 9/12 HH MG 9/13 HH MG 9/14 HH MG 9/15 HH
MG 10/1 BP MG 10/2 BP MG 10/3 BP
MG 10/4 BP MG 10/5 BP MG 10/6 BP MG 10/7 BP
MG 10/8 BP MG 10/9 BP
MG 10/10 BP
MG 10/11 BP MG 10/12 BP
MG 10/13 BP
MG 10/14 BP MG 10/15 BP
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
122
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimtii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimit
ID
MG 11/1 HH MG 12/1 BS MG 13/1 HH MG 14/1 HH MG 15/1 HH MG 16/1 BS MG 17/1 HH MG 18/1 HH MG 18/1A BS MG 19/1 HH MG 19/2 HH MG 19/3 HH MG 19/4 HH MG 19/5 HH
MG 19/6 HH MG 19/7 HH
MG 19/8 HH
MG 19/9 HH
MG 19/10 HH MG 19/11 HH MG 19/12 HH MG 19/13 HH MG 19/14 HH
MG 19/15 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
123
Appendix |]
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID MG 19/16 HH
MG 19/17 HH MG 19/18 HH MG 19/19 HH MG 19/20 HH
MG 19/21 HH MG 19/22 HH
MG 19/23 HH MG 19/24 HH
MG 19/25 HH MG 19/26 HH
MG 20/1 BS
MG 20/2 BS MG 20/3 BS
MG 20/4 BS
MG 20/5 BS MG 20/6 BS MG 20/7 BS MG 20/8 BS MG 20/9 BS MG 20/10 BS MG 20/11 BS
MG 20/12 BS MG 20/13 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
124
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimti Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID MG 20/14 BS
MG 20/15 BS MG 20/16 BS
MG 20/17 BS
MG 20/18 BS MG 20/19 BS
MG 20/20 BS
MG 20/21 BS MG 21/1 HH
MG 21/2 HH
MG 21/3 HH MG 21/4 HH
MG 21/5 HH
MG 21/6 HH MG 21/7 HH MG 21/8 HH
MG 21/9 HH
MG 21/10 HH
MG 22/1 BS MG 23/1 HH
MG 24/1 HH MG 25/1 HH
MG 26/1 BS MG 27/1 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix |
125
Date
31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00 31-Jan-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimit
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
AG 1/1 HH AG 1/2 HH AG 2/1 HH AG 2/2 HH AG 3/1 HH
AG 4/1 HH AG 5/1 HH
AG 5/2 HH
AG 6/1 HH AG 6/2 HH
AG 7/1 HH AG 7/2 HH
AG 8/1 BS AG 8/2 BS
AG 8/3 BS AG 9/1 HH AG 10/1 BS AG 11/1 HH
AG 11/2 HH AG 12/1 BS
AG 12/2 BS AG 12/3 BS
AG 13/1 HH AG 14/1 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
126
Date
01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heim Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
ID
AG 15/1 HH AG 16/1 BS AG 17/1 HH AG 18/1 HH AG 19/1 HH AG 20/1 HH
AG 21/1 HH AG 22/1 BS AG 23/1 HH
AG 24/1 BS
AG 25/1 HH AG 26/1 BS
AG 26/2 BS
AG 26/3 BS AG 26/4 BS
AG 26/5 BS AG 27/1 HH AG 27/2 HH AG 27/3 HH
AG 27/4 HH AG 27/5 HH AG 27/6 HH
AG 27/7 HH AG 27/8 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
127
Date
01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimit
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Bryum pseudotriquetrum Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Hennidiella heimii
ID AG 27/9 HH
AG 27/10 HH AG 27/11 HH AG 27/12 HH AG 27/13 HH AG 27/14 HH AG 27/15 HH MS 1/1 HH
MS 1/2 HH MS 2/1 HH
MS 3/1 HH
MS 3/2 HH MS 4/1 HH
MS 5/1 HH MS 6/1 HH
MS 7/1 BP MS 8/1 HH
MS 9/1 HH
MS 10/1 HH MS 11/1 HH MS 12/1 HH MS 13/1 HH MS 14/1 BP
MS 15/1 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
128
Date
0O1-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 0O1-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 0.1-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
ID
MS 16/1 HH MS 17/1 HH MS 18/1 BP MS 19/1 HH MS 20/1 HH MS 21/1 HH
MS 22/1 HH MS 23/1 HH
MS 24/1 HH
MS 25/1 HH MS 26/1 HH
MS 27/1 HH
MS 28/1 BS
MS 29/1 HH MS 30/1 HH
MS 31/1 HH
MS 32/1 HH MS 33/1 HH
MS 34/1 HH MS 35/1 HH MS 36/1 HH MS 37/1 HH
MS 38/1 HH MS 39/1 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
129
Appendix 1
Date
01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00
Locality
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimit
Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
ID MS 40/1 HH
MS 41/1 HH MS 42/1 HH
MS 43/1 HH MS 44/1 HH
MS 45/1 BS MS 46/1 HH
MS 47/1 HH
MS 48/1 HH MS 49/1 BS
MS 50/1 HH
MS 51/1 BS MS 52/1 HH
MS 52/2 HH
MS 52/3 HH MS 52/4 HH
MS 52/5 HH
MS 52/6 HH MS 52/7 HH MS 52/8 HH
MS 52/9 HH
MS 52/10 HH MS 52/11 HH
MS 52/12 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
130
Date
01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID MS 52/13 HH
MS 52/14 HH
MS 52/15 HH MS 52/16 HH MS 52/17 HH
MS 52/18 HH
MS 52/19 HH MS 52/20 HH
CC 1/1 BS
CC 1/2 BS CC 1/3 BS
CC 2/1 BS
CC 2/2 BS CC 3/1 BS
CC 3/2 BS CC 3/3 BS CC 4/1 BS CC 5/1 BS CC 5/2 BS CC 5/3 BS CC 5/4 BS CC 6/1 BS CC 7/1 BS CC 7/2 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
131
Date 0O1-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 01-Feb-00 O1-Feb-00 O1-Feb-00 O1-Feb-00 O1-Feb-00 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01
Locality Miers Valley, Antarctica
Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Miers Valley, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
ID
CC 8/1 BS CC 8/2 BS CC 8/3 BS CC 8/4 BS
CC 9/1 BS CC 9/2 BS
CC 9/3 BS
GH 1/1 BS GH 1/2 BS
GH 1/3 BS
GH 1/4 BS GH 1/5 BS
GH 1/6 BS
GH 1/7 BS CG 422
CG 423-1
CG 423-2
CG 423-3 CG 423-4
CG 424
GH 2/1 BS GH 2/2 BS
GH 2/3 BS GH 2/4 BS
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix |
Island
Ross Is Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
Ross Is Ross Is
Ross Is
132
Date
13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01
Locality
Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Cape Crozier, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctic Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum pseudotriquetrum Bryum pseudotriquetrum
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
ID
GH 2/5 BS GH 3/1 BS GH 4/1 BS GH 5/1 BP GH 6/1 BP
GH 7/1 BS GH 7/2 BS
GH 7/3 BS GH 8/1 BS
GH 8/2 BS GH 8/3 BS
GH 8/4 BS ME 1/1 BS ME 1/2 BS
MP 1/1 BS
MP 1/2 BS MP 1/3 BS
MP 1/4 BS
MP 2/1 HH MP 2/2 HH
MP 2/3 HH MP 2/4 HH
MP 3/1 HH MP 3/2 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
133
Appendix |
Date
18-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 19-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 20-Jan-01 20-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01
Locality Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica Granite Harbour, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium
Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium
Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
ID
MP 3/3 HH MP 4/1 BS MP 4/2 BS MP 4/3 BS
MP 4/4 BS MP 4/5 BS
MP 5/1 HH MP 5/2 HH MP 5/3 HH MP 5/4 HH
MP 5/5 HH MP 6/1 BS
MP 6/2 BS
MP 6/3 BS MP 6/4 BS
MP 7/1 BS
MP 7/2 BS MP 7/3 BS
MP 8/1 HH
MP 8/2 HH MP 8/3 HH MP 8/4 HH
MP 9/1 HH MP 9/2 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix 1
134
Date
22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 22-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01
Locality
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctic Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Bryum subrotundifolium Hennidiella heimti
Hennidiella heimii Hennidiella heimii
Hennidiella heimii
ID MP 9/3 HH
MP 10/1 HH MP 10/2 HH MP 10/3 HH
MP 10/4 HH MP 10/5 HH MP 10/6 HH MP 10/7 HH
MP 10/8 HH MP 10/9 HH
MP 10/10 HH
MP 10/11 HH MP 10/12 HH
MP 10/13 HH MP 10/14 HH MP 11/1 BS MP 11/2 BS MP 11/3 BS
MP 11/4 BS MP 11/5 BS
MP 12/1 HH
MP 12/2 HH MP 12/3 HH
MP 12/4 HH
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Island
Appendix |
135
Date
23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 23-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01 24-Jan-01
Locality
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica
Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctica Marble Point, Antarctic Hennidiella heimti
Bryum argenteum Bryum argenteum
Bryum argenteum
Bryum argenteum Bryum argenteum
Bryum argenteum
ID
MP 12/5 HH M1 Anderson Gl M1 Von Gl
M2 Von Gl
M3 Von Gl
M1 Bowles Gl M2 Bowles Gl M3 Bowles Gl M1 Huey Gl
M3 Huey Gl M1 Canada Gl
M2 Canada Gl M3 Canada Gl
HR 1/1 BA HR 1/2 BA
HR 2/1 BA
HR 2/2 BA HR 3/1 BA
HR 3/2 BA
Source
Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild Wild
Appendix 1
Island
North Island North Island
North Island
North Island North Island
North Island
136
Date
24-Jan-01 13-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 16-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 18-Jan-01 15-Feb-01 15-Feb-01 15-Feb-01 15-Feb-01 15-Feb-01 15-Feb-01
Locality
Marble Point, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Taylor Valley, Antarctica Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Taylor Valley, Antarctica Hillcrest road Ham. Hillcrest road Ham.
Hillcrest road Ham.
Hillcrest road Ham. Hillcrest road Ham.
Hillcrest road Ham. APPENDIX 2
REAGENT PROTOCOLS AND SUPPLIES
 
This appendix contains protocols from the making of solutions and other materials used in the microsatellite development protocol. There is a section on equations used to make molar solutions and for diluting stock solutions to the correct concentrations at the end of this appendix. Many of the chemicals and reagents used in these protocols are extremely hazardous and often very expensive, all of them should be handled with care and the Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) consulted before using for the first time.
Please note: All solutions should be autoclaved unless otherwise instructed.
This list is not comprehensive, some other reagents may be required for completion of the whole protocol, useful references are: Sambrook et al. (1989), Promega Applications Guide and Molecular Biology Labfax.
REAGENT PROTOCOLS
30% Acrylamide: 19:1, acryalamide: bisacrylamide
For 100 mL mix in a fumehood or Captair cabinet 29.0 g of acrylamide 1.0 g N, N-methylenebisacrylamide (bisacrylamide) 42.0 g Urea
Add to 60 mL of ultrapure water (Milli-Q or RO), heat to 37°C to dissolve chemicals, make up to 100 mL with Milli-Q water. Filter solution and check pH is
close to 7.0, store at room temperature in a dark bottle. CARE REQUIRED; POTENT NEUROTOXIN AND TERATOGEN. Do not autoclave.
10% Ammonium persulphate (APS)
For 10 mL mix 1.0 g APS 9.0 mL Milli-Q water
Dissolve APS and then make up to 10 mL with Milli-Q water. Store at 4°C, will keep for several weeks. Do not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED; RADICAL
GENERATOR.
Ampicillin (S50 mg mL’) Add the following to a 15 mL foil covered tube 0.50 g Ampicillin 10.0 mL dH,0 Mix by shaking until Ampicillin has dissolved. Aliquot 1.0 mL into 1.5 mL tubes and store at -20°C. CARE REQUIRED; ANTIBIOTIC. Do not autoclave.
B1 (Pre-lysis buffer): 25 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.2 mg mL’! RNAse A
For 50 mL mix 1.25 mL 1.0 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0 
1.0 mL 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) 1.0 mL RNAse A (10 mg mL’)
Make up to 50 mL with dH2O in a 50 mL centrifuge tube. Store at 4°C. Do not autoclave.
B2 (Lysis buffer): 1.0% SDS (v/v), 0.2 M NaOH For 30 mL mix 26.4 mL dH,O
3.0 mL 10% SDS (Sodium dodecyl] sulphate) 600 nL 10 N NaOH
Mix in a 50 mL centrifuge tube and adjust pH to 12.0. Store at 4°C. Do not autoclave.
B3 (Neutralising solution): 1.0 M Potassium acetate For 30 mL mix 8.84 g Potassium acetate Add to 25 mL dH20O in a 50 mL centrifuge tube, adjust pH to 5.5 and make up to
30 mL. Store at 4°C. Do not autoclave.
C:I: Chloroform: Isoamyl alcohol, 24:1 (v/v)
Mix 24 parts Chloroform with | part Isoamyl alcohol. Do not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED; CHOLOFROM IS HIGHLY TOXIC.
1x CTAB extraction buffer: 1.0% CTAB (w/v), 100mM Tris, 20 mM EDTA, 1.4 M NaCl, 1.0% PVP (w/v)
For | L mix
10.0 g CTAB (Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide)
12.1 g Tris-base
7.45 g EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, disodium salt)
81.8 g NaCl
10.0 g PVP (Polyvinylpyrrolidone, MW 40 000) Add to 800 mL distilled H,O (dH2O), stir until dissolved (heating may be necessary), bring volume to nearly 1 L and adjust pH to 8.0, make to final volume of 1 L. CARE REQUIRED; CTAB WILL DISSOLVE CELLULAR
MEMBRANES.
10% CTAB buffer: 10% CTAB (w/v), 0.7 M NaCl For 100 mL mix 10.0 g CTAB 4.09 g NaCl Make up to 100 mL with dH,O in volumetric flask. CARE REQUIRED; CTAB WILL DISSOLVE CELLULAR MEMBRANES.
CTAB precipitation buffer: 1.0% CTAB (w/v), 50 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA For 1 L mix 10.0 g CTAB 6.06 g Tris-base 20.0 mL 0.5 M ETDA (pH 8.0) Add 950 mL dH2O, adjust pH to 8.0, make up to 1 L. CARE REQUIRED; CTAB WILL DISSOLVE CELLULAR MEMBRANES 
Denaturing solution: 0.5 N‘ NaOH, 1.5 M NaCl For | L mix
20.00 g NaOH (add slowly to water, evolves heat when dissolved) 87.66 g NaCl
Add to 700 mL dH20O, dissolve solids and make up to final volume of 1000 mL. CARE REQUIRED; CORROSIVE.
50x Denhardt’s solution: 1.0% BSA (w/v), 1.0% Ficoll (w/v), 1.0% PVP (w/v) For 50 mL mix in a 50 mL centrifuge tube
0.5 g Bovine Serum Albumin, fraction V (BSA)
0.5 g Ficoll
0.5 g PVP Add Milli-Q water up to 50 mL and mix until all solids have dissolved, filter
sterilise and store at 4°C for short-term or -20°C for long-term. Do not autoclave.
dNTP (1 mM each) For 10 mL mix
100.0 wL 100 mM dATP 100.0 pL 100 mM dGTP 100.0 wL 100 mM dCTP
100.0 nL 100 mM dTTP Add to 9.60 mL Milli-Q H20, mix thoroughly, aliquot 1.0 mL into 1.5 mL tubes,
store at -20°C. Do not autoclave.
EDTA (0.5 M) For 500 mL mix
93.1 g EDTA (disodium salt) EDTA will not dissolve unless the pH of the solution is 8.0. Dissolve approximately 7.0 g of NaOH in about 300 mL dH,0 then add the EDTA, continue adding NaOH until the pH 1s close to 8.0. The EDTA should now dissolve slowly, bring volume close to 500 mL and adjust pH to 8.0 with 10 M NaOH, adjust final volume to 500 mL and check pH again, adjust if needed.
Ethidium bromide (5 mg mL’)
For 5 mL In a brown glass bottle dissolve 25 mg Ethidium bromide
5.0 mL dH2,0 Mix until solids are dissolved, store at room temperature. CARE REQUIRED; TERATOGEN, USE A CAPTAIR CABINET TO WEIGH SOLID. Do not
autoclave.
6x Gel Loading Dye: 0.05% Bromophenol Blue/Xylene cyanol (v/v), 15% Ficoll (v/v), 30 mM EDTA
For one millilitre mix 50.0 wL 1.0% Bromophenol Blue/Xylene cyanol mix (BBXC)
* Normal solutions (N) are solutions that contain one ‘gram equivalent weight’ (gEW) of solute per litre of solution. The gEW is equal to the molar mass of the solute divided by the valency of the solute. For example, for a 1.0 N solution of Magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) M,=58.33 g mol’. Mg(OH), contains two hydroxyl groups so half a mole of Mg(OH) will accept one mole of protons (H*), therefore the valency is two. Thus 58.33/2 = 29.165 g, dissolve this in one litre of water to make a 1.0 N solution ————_—_ —_ assess ESE
750.0 tL 70 % Ficoll 60.0 uL 0.5 M EDTA
Add to 140.0 wL dH20O in a 1.5 mL tube, store at room temperature or at 4°C. Do
not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED, BBXC IS HIGHLY TOXIC IN POWDERED FORM
IPTG (Isopropyl B-D-thiogalactopyranoside) (100 mM) Add to a foil covered 15 mL tube
0.50 g IPTG
12.25 mL dH2O
Mix by shaking, until the solids have dissolved. Aliquot 1.0 mL into 1.5 mL tubes and store at -20°C. Do not autoclave.
LB-broth (Luria-Bertani broth): 1.0% Tryptone (w/v), 0.5% Yeast extract (w/v), 1.0% NaCl (w/v) For | L mix 10.0 g Tryptone 5.0 g Yeast extract
10.0 g NaCl Add to 990 mL dH,0O, adjust pH to 7.0, make up to 1000 mL. Autoclave and allow
to cool to at least 50 °C before adding antibiotics.
LB-agar plates: 1.0% Tryptone (w/v), 0.5% Yeast extract (w/v), 1.0% NaCl (w/v), 1.5% Agar (w/v)
Make LB-Broth as above, but add 15 g L” agar before autoclaving. If making one
litre, divide into two 500 mL flasks and allow to cool to 50°C before adding antibiotics and pouring into plates.
Neutralising solution: 0.5 M Tris, 1.5 M NaCl
For | L mix 60.55 g Tris-base
87.66 g NaCl Make up to 970 mL with dH,O, adjust pH to 7.7, make to final volume of 1000 mL.
P:C:I: Phenol: Chloroform: Isoamy] alcohol, 25:24:1 (v/v)
To make P:C:I , measure a volume of TE saturated Phenol into a glass measuring cylinder and take the volume of the organic layer, then add an equal volume of C:], transfer to a separating funnel and shake well, venting the funnel frequently. Finally let the funnel stand until the layers have separated and drain the organic layer, with a little of the aqueous into a brown bottle and discard the remainder, repeat twice more and check the pH, when it is between 7.0 and 8.0, the equilibration is finished, top off the bottle with a layer of 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 100 wL B-Mercaptoethanol. Store at 4 °C in a brown glass bottle. Do not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED; PHENOL AND CHLOROFORM PRODUCE TOXIC VAPOUR.
PEG: 20% PEG 8000 (w/v), 2.5 M NaCl
For 50 mL mix 10.0 g PEG 8000
7.305 g NaCl
Dissolve in 25 mL dH.2O and make up to final volume of 50 mL. Store at 4°C. Do not autoclave 
10% SDS (Sodium dodecyl] sulfate) (w/v)
For 100 g L”, dissolve 100g SDS and dilute to 1000 mL with dH,O. Do not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED; IRRITANT, WEAR MASK OR WORK IN FUMEHOOD WHEN WEIGHING.
Sequencing loading dye: 80% Formamide, 0.01% BBXC For 1 mL mix
800 uL Formamide (deionised)
200 WL 0.5% BBXC solution Mix in a foil covered bijou or dark glass bottle and cap firmly. Store in a vented cupboard or in a fume hood. ALL WORK WITH FORMAMIDE (TERATOGEN) MUST BE DONE IN A FUMEHOOD WITH NITRILE GLOVES OR OTHER SUITABLE PROTECTION. BBXC IS VERY TOXIC, TAKE CARE AROUND POWDER FORM.
Sodium acetate (3 M) For 1 L mix 246.09 g Sodium acetate (anhydrous) Add to 900 mL dH20O, mix until all solids have dissolved and make up to final volume of 1000 mL.
Sodium hydroxide (10 N) For 100 mL
40.0 g NaOH (pellets) Add slowly to 90 mL dH,O. Heat is evolved during this step, cool flask under
running water. When all pellets are dissolved, make up to final volume of 100 mL. CARE REQUIRED, VERY CORROSIVE.
20x SSC (standard saline citrate): 3 M NaCl, 0.3 M Sodium citrate For 2 L mix
351.0 g NaCl
176.0 g Sodium citrate Dissolve in 1800 mL dH2O and bring to final volume of 2000 mL.
1x STE buffer (high salt TE): 10 mM Tris, 1.0 mM EDTA, 1.0 M NaCl
For | L mix 10.0 mL 1.0 M Tris-base (pH 8.0)
2.0 mL 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) 58.44 g NaCl Bring to final volume of 1000 mL with dH2O, after adjusting pH to 8.0.
5x TBE: 445 mM Tris, 444 mM Orthoboric acid, 11 mM EDTA
For 2 L mix 108.0 g Tris-base
55.0 g Orthoboric acid 8.3 g EDTA (disodium salt)
Add to 1950 mL dH,0O, adjust pH to 8.0 (+ 0.3), and make up to final volume of 2000 mL.
1x TE buffer: 10 mM Tris, 1.0 mM EDTA For 1 L mix
 10.0 mL | M Tris-base (pH8.0) 2.0 mL 0.5 M EDTA Bring to final volume of 1000 mL with dH20.
Tetracycline (13 mg mL") Add to a 15 mL foil covered tube 0.13 g Tetracycline 10 mL 50% ethanol Mix until Tetracycline is dissolved, store at —-20°C. Inspect for precipitation of
solids, and discard when present. CARE REQUIRED; ANTIBIOTIC. Do not autoclave.
Tris-HCI (1 M) For | L mix 40.37 g Tris-base 105.07 g Tris-HCl Dissolve in 700 mL dH2O, and adjust pH to 8.0 using concentrated HCl. Make up to final volume of 1000 mL, double-check pH and adjust if necessary.
1x TSS: 10% (w/v) PEG 8000, 5.0% (v/v) DMSO, 50 mM MgSO, For 50 mL, add to a 40 mL LB-broth in a 5O mL tube 5.0 g PEG (Polyethylene glycol) 8000 5.0 mL DMSO (Dimethyl! sulphoxide) 2.) mL 1.0 M MgSQ, Adjust pH to 6.5 (if necessary) and make up to final volume of 50 mL using
LB-broth. Filter-sterilise and store at 4°C. Do not autoclave.
X-Gal (5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indoly] B-D-galactopyranoside) (SO mM) In a 15 mL Tube 0.20 g X-Gal
10.0 mL Dimethyl! formamide (DMF) or 50% DMSO Wrap tube in foil and mix by shaking until the X-Gal has dissolved completely,
store in freezer at -20°C. Do not autoclave. CARE REQUIRED; DMF AND DMSO ARE POTENTIAL TERATOGENS
2 X YT-Broth: 1.6% Tryptone (w/v), 1.0% Yeast extract (w/v), 0.5% NaCl (w/v)
For 1 L mix 16.0 g Tryptone 10.0 g Yeast extract 5.0 g NaCl
Add to 900 mL of dH,O, stir until all solutes have dissolved. Adjust pH to7.0 with 5 N NaOH and make up to | L with dH20.
USEFUL EQUATIONS:
1.C=n/V
Where ‘C’ is the concentration in mol Lt ‘n’ 1s the number of mole of substance you have, and ‘V’ is the final volume in litres. Thus if I need to make 250 mL of a
two-molar solution of NaCl (Sodium chloride), I need to know the number of mole required for that volum C=mol L", V=0.25L Make ‘n’ the subject of the equation:
n=CxV n= 2.0 mol L?! x 0.25 L n=0.5 mole
Thus, I need half a mole of NaCl to make 250 mL of a two-molar solution. 2.n=m/m,
Where ‘n’ is the number of mole of substance you have, “m’ is the mass you have, and ‘m,’ is the molar mass of the substance in g mol'. For example, for the 250 mL, two-molar solution of NaCl (m= 58.44) above, I need to work out the mass of NaC] required for this solution:
n= 0.5 mole, m, = 58.44 g mol.
Make ‘m’ the subject of the equation
m=nXm, m=0.5 mol x 58.44 g mol” m= 29.22 g
Thus, I need 29.22¢ of NaCl to make 250 mL of a two-molar solution of NaCl.
3, CV; = C,V>
Where ‘C,’ is the final concentration of a solution you want, ‘V,’ is the final volume you want, ‘C,’ is the initial concentration you have and ‘V,’ is the initial
volume you have. For example, if I need to make 50 mL of 100 mM NaCl solution and I have the two-molar solution made above:
V, =50 mL, C; = 0.1 mol L'', C) = 2.0 mol L'!
Make ‘V,’ the subject of the equation
V2 =CiV/C> V,=0.1 mol L'! x 50 mL/2.0 mol L' V> =2.5 mL
Thus to make the 100 mM solution above, I need to take 2.5 mL of 2.0 mol L! NaCl and make up to a final volume of 50 mL.
N.B. Cancellation of the units in (3) above is correct as this is a ratio, thus it 1s possible to mix ‘mL’ with ‘mol L’'’ for this equation, but it is necessary to work with litres and grams as units for volumes and masses to be consistent with the g mol! and mol L"! in equations one and two $$$ Cece
SUPPLIES
This section of the Appendix contains chemical and expendable equipment used for the microsatellite development protocol. Reagents and equipment are catalogued by name, supplier and catalogue number
 
Chemical Formula Supplier Catalogue # Acrylamide C3;H3;NO BDH 44313 2V Agar - Applichem A3477 0250 Agarose - Roche 1 388 99] Ampicillin Ci6HigsN304SNa Roche 835 242 APS (NH4)2S202 Si gma A-9164 *SP_dATP - Amersham BF1000-250uCi BBXC - Sigma B-3269 Bisacrylamide CrHioN202 Sigma M-2022 BSA (Fraction V) - Sigma A-4503 Chloramphenicol C,H j2Cl.N20s BDH 44204 2Q Chloroform CH;3Cl BDH 10077 6B CTAB Ci9H42NBr Sigma H-6269 Dithiothreitol (DTT) C4Hj0S202 GibcoBRL 15508-013 DMSO C,H.6SO Sigma D-8418 DNTP - Roche 1 277 049 EDTA CyioHi4N2O0OgNar Sigma E-5134 Ethidium bromide C>,;H2oN3Br Sigma E-7637 Ficoll - Sigma F-4375 Formamide HCONH) BDH 444472T Glucose C.6H)20¢ BDH 100117 4Y Glycerol C3H:03 ICN 193996 Biomedicals Hydrochloric acid HCl BDH 45002 0H IPTG CoH 1302S Sigma I-5502 iso-Amyl alcohol CsH,,;OH BDH 10038 3L Kanamycin sulphate C)gH36N4011;.H2,SO4 GibcoBRL 11815-024 Magnesium chloride MgCl Scharlau Ma 0037 Magnesium sulphate MgSQ4.7H2O Sigma M-2773 Malt extract - ICN 1006917 Biomedicals 8-Mercaptoethanol C,H.6OS Sigma M-6250 Orthoboric acid H3BO3 BDH 10058 3R P:C:I - Sigma P-3803 PEG 8000 - Sigma P-5413 Potassium acetate KC,H302 Sigma P-1190 Potassium chloride KCl BDH 43702 3F PVP 40000 - Sigma PVP-40T Sodium acetate C,H30,Na Sigma S-2889 Sodium chloride NaCl BDH 44382 4T Sodium citrate CeHsNa307 BDH 43607 5N Sodium dodecyl Ci2H25O4Sna Gibco BRL 15525-017 sulphate Sodium hydroxide NaOH Scharlau So 0420 TEMED CeHi6N2 Sigma T-7024 Tetracycline Cy2H24N208 Sigma T-325 
(Freebase) Tris-base C4H,,;NO3 Applichem Trizma-HCl C,H, ,NO3.HC!I Sigma (Tris-HCl) Tryptone - ICN Biomedicals UTP (Li Salt) - Roche X-gal Ci4H |sBrCINOg Sigma Yeast extract - Serva Hardware Item Supplier 10 pL pipette tips Scientific Specialities Inc. Mettler toledo 250 uL pipette tips Scientific Specialities Inc. Molecular Bioproducts Inc. 1000 uL pipette tips Scientific Specialities Inc. Molecular Bioproducts Inc. 0.2 mL PCR tubes Scientific Specialities Inc. 0.5 mL PCR tubes Scientific Specialities Inc. 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes Scientific Specialities Inc. 15 mL tubes Scientific Specialities Inc. 50 mL tubes Scientific Specialities Inc. Developer Kodak Film Kodak Fixer Kodak Gel Extraction Kit Life Technologies Plasmid preparations Eppendorf
A1379 1000 T-3253
1010817
3 420 470 B-4252 24540
Catalogue # PT-01-N
4220-00 4330-00
3210-00 3320-00 1211-00 2835-SP-50100 2935-SP-50100 400 9510
165 4545
400 9478 11456-019
Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems
Primer Sequences
Primer Sequence
ITS4 TCC TCC GTC TAT TGA TAT GC ITSSHP GGA AGG AGA AGT CGT AAC AAG G M13 universal forward TGT AAA ACG ACG GCC AGT
M13 universal reverse GGA AAC AGC TAT GAC CAT G OPA3 AGT CAG CCA C
Melting Temperature Calculations
For oligonucleotides greater than 10 bp in length and 1 M salt (annealing
conditions):
Tm = 81.5 + 41(%G/C) - (675/primer length)
(Equation 1)
For primers greater than 10 bp in length in 50 mM salt solution (PCR conditions):
Tm = 59.9 + 41(%G/C) — (675/ primer length)
(Equation 2)
Where percent G/C values are the decimal value (e.g. 46% G/C = 0.46) and the
primer length is in base pairs APPENDIX 3
SUPPLEMENTARY PROTCOLS
AGAROSE GEL ELECTROPHORESIS To make a 1.5% agarose gel in 1x TBE buffer, 1.5 % (weight per volume) of
agarose was weighed out and added to the corresponding volume of 1x TBE
buffer in a conical flask (e.g., for a 1.5% agarose gel of 50 mL volume, use 0.75 g
agarose in 50 mL of 1x TBE buffer). This was then weighed and heated to boiling point in a microwave, at which point the solution was taken out and swirled. It was then re-weighed and distilled water added to make up the volume lost, with a little extra to account for evaporation during further heating and cooling. The solution was then re-heated 1n the microwave until the agarose was completely dissolved. A gel mould of suitable size was set up with an appropriate comb while the agarose/TBE solution was cooling to approximately 50°C. When the agarose solution had cooled, 0.1 ng mL” ethidium bromide was added and thoroughly mixed by swirling. The solution was then poured into the mould, any bubbles removed and the gel allowed to set. Once set, the comb was removed to form the wells, and the gel was placed in a horizontal, submarine-gelelectrophoresis tank containing 1x TBE buffer so that the gel was completely
submerged under 0.5 - 1.0 cm of buffer. To submarine load DNA into the gel, an aliquot of DNA solution was mixed with one tenth of the aliquot volume of loading buffer (bromophenol blue/ xylene cyanol). This mixture was then
pipetted into the wells on the gel. Gels were electrophoresed at between 2.4 and
4.0 Watts per centimetre of gel length.
PLASMID MINI-PREP (MODIFIED X-GEN PROTOCOL)
1. From an overnight culture of cells, aliquot 1.5 mL of cells into a labelled
Eppendorf tube, centrifuge at Gmax for two minutes on a bench-top centrifuge.
2. Aspirate away supernatant and add 100 pL B1 using a wide bore pipette tip, re-suspend the pellet.
3. Add 100 uL B2 to each tube and mix by inversion for one to three
minutes. Clearing of the solution indicates complete mixing 
4. Add 100 uL of B3 and mix by inversion. When a white precipitate is
observed (two phases obvious) vigorously shake the tube to break up the precipitate. 5. Centrifuge the tubes at Gmax for five minutes and transfer the supernatant to
a new tube, making sure none of the white precipitate is transferred. 6. Add 1.0 mL of -20°C, 95% Ethanol and incubate at -20°C for | hour or
more. 7. Centrifuge tubes at Gmax for five minutes and aspirate away supernatant. A white pellet should now be visible, dry the pellet completely ina DNA
speed-vac (Savant)
8. Re-suspend the pellet in 50-80 wL TLE buffer or Milli-Q water, centrifuge
at Gmax for two minutes and transfer to a new tube.
9. Quantify the plasmid DNA on a 1.5 % agarose gel in TBE buffer.
POLYACRYLAMIDE GEL ELECTROPHORESIS (PAGE)
To make a polyacrylamide gel for sequencing or running microsatellite amplification products, it 1s necessary to have the solutions pre-prepared, this requires linear acrylamide (30%), N, N-methylenebisacrylamide, 10% APS (ammonium persulphate) and TEMED (N, N, N’, N’-tetramethylethylenediamine). Care is required in the manufacture of all these solutions as all are suspected carcinogens or neurotoxins. Linear acrylamide especially is a neurotoxin, and suspected carcinogen. It must be handled with care; all preparations involving the
powdered from must be carried out in a fume hood or Captair cabinet.
Make sure all the glassware is clean, especially the plates for the gel. These can be cleaned using KOH/methanol (~5 g KOH pellets in 100 mL methanol), then washed with detergent and rinsed under tap water, then distilled water. Make sure that the plates are held by the edges so that grease from the fingers does not get on to working surfaces. Finally, rinse with ethanol and allow to dry. Treat one surface of each plate with a silicone solution (e.g. Sigmacote, care, work in a fumehood) by wiping gently over the surface with Kim-wipes and rinsing in deionised water, then dry with a hair dryer. The silicone prevents the gel from
sticking to the glass when removed from the electrophoresis apparatus  
Set up a gel mould with 0.4 mm spacers on either side, making sure all the sides are sealed adequately. This is done by laying the large glass plate down and
placing the spacers down the sides with a minute amount of Vasoline to keep them in place. Lay the smaller plate on top of the spacers and align with one end
of the big plate. Tightly tape the two sides and bottom together for a watertight
seal.
For this protocol, 6% denaturing polyacrylamide gels are used. To prepare a 6%
gel, mix in vacuum flask: 20 mL acrylamide solution, 20 mL 5x TBE buffer and
add deionised water to 100 mL, then add 500 WL 10% APS and de-gas the
solution with swirling until the solution stops bubbling. Degassing is an important step as the formation of the cross-linking bonds in polyacrylamide is
inhibited in the presence of oxygen. Wearing gloves and working over a spill
tray, add 35 UL TEMED to 100 mL of the 6% acrylamide solution and mix.
Draw the solution into a 50 mL syringe and expel any air drawn up at the same time. Place the nozzle of the syringe at the opening. Fill the gel mould almost to the top making sure no air bubbles are present in the gel, and keep remaining solution at 4°C to slow polymerisation. Place the gel mould at a 10° tilt and insert
a comb (sharkstooth for microsatellites), making sure there is no air trapped between the comb and the gel. If there is a gap between the top of the gel and the top of the mould, fill completely with some of the remaining gel solution. Clamp the comb in place and check that there is no acrylamide leaking from the mould.
Allow the gel to polymerise for at least 2 hours, longer is preferable.
Once gel is polymerised remove the comb and wash the wells out immediately with MilliQ water, and remove the tape from the sides and bottom of the gel
mould. Clamp the gel into the electrophoresis tank; the smaller plate should face the buffer reservoir. Fill the reservoirs with 1x TBE, or the same buffer as used to make the gel and remove any air bubbles trapped under the gel mould. Flush the
wells of the gel with more 1x TBE buffer.
Load the gel, making sure that samples do not spill over into the next well, connect the electrodes to a power pack and run at 1 — 8 V cm’ for the times
shown in Table 2.3